The Project Gutenberg eBook of For love of life; vol. 1 of 2, by Mrs.Margaret OliphantThis eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States andmost other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictionswhatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the termsof the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online atwww.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, youwill have to check the laws of the country where you are located beforeusing this eBook.Title: For love of life; vol. 1 of 2Author: Mrs. Margaret OliphantRelease Date: July 28, 2021 [eBook #65934]Language: EnglishCharacter set encoding: UTF-8Produced by: Chuck Greif and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team athttp://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from imagesavailable at The Internet Archive)*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FOR LOVE OF LIFE; VOL. 1 OF 2 ***COLLECTIONOFBRITISH AUTHORSTAUCHNITZ EDITION.VOL. 1419.FOR LOVE AND LIFE BY MRS. OLIPHANT.IN TWO VOLUMES.VOL. I."The device on his shield was a young oak tree pulled up by the roots,with the Spanish word Desdichado, signifying Disinherited."FOR LOVE AND LIFE.BYMRS. OLIPHANT,AUTHOR OF"CHRONICLES OF CARLINGFORD," "OMBRA," "MAY," ETC.COPYRIGHT EDITION.IN TWO VOLUMES.VOL. I.LEIPZIGBERNHARD TAUCHNITZ1874.The Right of Translation is reserved.FOR LOVE AND LIFE.CHAPTER I.On the Shores of Loch Arroch.Three people were walking slowly along together by the side of thewater. One of them an invalid, as was apparent by the softly measuredsteps of her companions, subdued to keep in harmony with hers. These twoattendants were both young; the girl about twenty, a little lightcreature, with the golden hair so frequent in Scotland, and a face ofthe angelic kind, half-childish, half-visionary, over-brimming withmeaning, or almost entirely destitute of it, according to the eyes withwhich you happened to regard her. Both she and the invalid, a handsomeold woman of about seventy, were well and becomingly dressed in a homelyway, but they had none of the subtle traces about them which mark the"lady" in conventional parlance. They were not in the smallest degreewhat people call "common-looking." The girl's beauty and natural gracewould have distinguished her anywhere, and the old lady was evendignified in her bearing. But yet it was plain that they were of a castenot the highest. They moved along the narrow path, skirting thenewly-cut stubble, with the air of people entirely at home, amid theirnatural surroundings. The homely farm-house within sight was evidentlytheir home. They belonged to the place and the place to them.Notwithstanding the angelic face of the one, and the natural statelinessof the other, they were farmer folk, of a kind not unusual on that proudhalf-Highland soil. I will not even pretend to say that good blood gavea grace to their decayed fortunes; I do not believe their race had everheld a more exalted position than it did now. They were independent asqueens, proud yet open-hearted, sociable, courteous, hospitable,possessed of many of the special virtues which ought to belong to thenobly born; but they were only farmer folk of Loch Arroch, of a familywho had lived for ages on that farm, and nothing more.It would have been unnecessary to dwell on this particular, had not theappearance of the young man upon whose arm the invalid leant, been sodifferent. As distinctly as they were native to the place, and to theposition, was he stranger to them. He was not so handsome by nature asthey, but he had about him all those signs of a man "in good society"which it is impossible to define in words, or to mistake in fact. Hisdress was extremely simple, but it was unmistakeably that of agentleman. Not the slightest atom of pretension was in his aspect ormanner, but his very simplicity was his distinction. The deferential wayin which he bent his head to hear what his companion was saying, therespect he showed to them both, was more than a son or brother in theirown rank would ever have dreamed of showing. He was kind in all hiswords and looks, even tender; but the ease of familiarity was wanting tohim; he was in a sphere different from his own. He showed this only by arespect infinitely more humble and anxious than any farmer-youth orhomely young squire would have felt; yet to his own fastidious taste itwas apparent that he did show it; and the thought made him condemnhimself. His presence introduced confusion and difficulty into thetranquil picture; though there was nothing of the agitation of a loverin his aspect. Love makes all things easy; it is agitating, but it istranquillizing. Had he been the lover of the beautiful young creature byhis side, he would have been set at his ease with her old mother, andwith the conditions of her lot. Love is itself so novel, sorevolutionary, such a break-down of all boundaries, that it accepts witha certain zest the differences of condition; and all the embarrassmentsof social difference such as trouble the acquaintance, and drive themarried man wild, become in the intermediate stage of courtshipdelightful auxiliaries, which he embraces with all his heart. But EdgarEarnshaw was not pretty Jeanie Murray's lover. He had a dutifulaffection for both of the women. Mingled with this was a certainreverential respect, mingled with a curious painful sense of wrong, forthe elder; and a pitying and protecting anxiety about the girl. Butthese sentiments were not love. Therefore he was kind, tender,respectful, almost devoted, but not at his ease, never one with them;in heart as in appearance, there was a difference such as could not beput into words.*       *       *       *       *"I cannot accept it from you," said old Mrs. Murray, who was thegrandmother of both. She spoke with a little vehemence, with aglimmering of tears in the worn old eyes, which were still so bright andfull of vital force. She was recovering from an illness, and thus thetears came more easily than usual. "Of all that call kin with me, Edgar,my bonnie lad, you are the last that should sacrifice your living tokeep up my auld and weary life. I canna do it. It's pride, nothing butpride, that makes me loth to go away--loth, loth to eat other folk'sbread. But wherefore should I be proud? What should an old woman like medesire better than a chair at my ain daughter's chimney-corner, and ashare of what she has, poor woman? I say to myself it's her man's breadI will eat, and no hers; but Robert Campbell will be kind--enough. He'llno grudge me my morsel. When a woman has been a man's faithful wife forthirty years, surely, surely she has a right to the gear she has helpedto make. And I'll no be that useless when I'm weel; there's many a thingabout a house that an old woman can do. Na, na, it's nothing but pride."*       *       *       *       *"And what if I had my pride too?" he asked. "My dear old mother, it goesagainst me to think of you as anywhere but at Loch Arroch. Mr. Campbellis an excellent man, I have no doubt, and kind--enough, as you say; andhis wife very good and excellent--""You might say your aunt, Edgar," said the old lady, with ahalf-reproach.He winced, though almost imperceptibly."Well," he said with a smile, "my aunt, if you prefer it. One thing Idon't like about you proud people is, that you never make allowance forother people's pride. Mine demands that my old mother should beindependent in her own old house; that she should have her pet companionwith her to nurse her and care for her." Here he laid his hand kindly,with a light momentary touch, upon the girl's shoulder, who looked up athim with wistful tender eyes. "That she should keep her old servants,and continue to be the noble old lady she is--""Na, na, Edgar; no lady. You must not use such a word to me. No, mybonnie man; you must not deceive yourself. It's hard, hard upon you, andGod forgive me for all I have done to make my good lad unhappy! We aredecent folk, Edgar, from father to son, from mother to daughter; but I'mno a lady; an old country wife, nothing more--though you are agentleman.""We will not dispute about words," said Edgar, with a shrug of hisshoulders. "What would become of Jeanie, grandmother, if you went toyour daughter, as you say?""Ah!" cried the old woman, pausing suddenly, and raising both her handsto her face, "that's what I canna bear--I canna bear it! Though Imust," she added hurriedly, drying her eyes, "if it's God's will.""I would go to my uncle in Glasgow," said Jeanie; "he's not an ill man.They would take me in if I was destitute; that's what they aye said.""If you were destitute!" cried Edgar. "My poor little Jeanie destitute,and you, my old mother, eating the bread of dependence, watching acoarse man's look to see if you are welcome or not! Impossible! I havearranged everything. There is enough to keep you both comfortablehere--not luxuriously, as I should wish; not with the comfort and theprettiness I should like to spread round you two; but yet enough. Nowlisten, grandmother. You must yield to me or to some one else; to me orto--Mr. Campbell. I think I have the best right.""He has the best right," said little Jeanie, looking in hergrandmother's face. "Oh, granny, he would like to be good to you andme!""Yes; I should like to be good to you," said Edgar, turning to the girlgratefully. "That is the truth. It is the highest pleasure you couldgive me.""To heap coals of fire," said the old woman in her deep voice."I know nothing about coals," said Edgar, laughing; "they should be morein Mr. Campbell's way, who trafficks in them. Come, Jeanie, we must takeher in, the wind grows cold. I shall go off to Loch Arroch Head to getthe newspaper when the boat comes, and you must persuade her in themeantime. You are my representative. I leave it all to you."A flush ran over Jeanie's angelic little countenance. She looked at himwith eyes full of an adoring admiration as he led the old womancarefully to the door of the farm-house. He patted her pretty shoulderas she followed, looking kindly at her."Take care of the old mother, Jeanie," he said, smiling. "I make you myrepresentative."Poor little innocent Jeanie! There was no one like him in all hersphere. She knew no other who spoke so softly, who looked so kindly, whowas so thoughtful of others, so little occupied with himself. Her littleheart swelled as she went into the low, quaint room with its smallwindows, where the grandmother had already seated herself. To be theparlour of a farm-house, it was a pretty room. The walls were greenish;the light that came in through foliage which overshadowed the smallpanes in the small windows was greenish too; but there were book-casesin the corners, and books upon the table, for use, not ornament, and anair of wellworn comfort and old respectability were about the place. Itwas curiously irregular in form; two windows in the front looked outupon the loch and the mountains, a prospect which a prince might haveenvied; and one on the opposite side of the fire-place, in the gable endof the house, in a deep recess, looked straight into the ivied walls ofthe ruin which furnished so many stories to Loch Arroch. This window wasalmost blocked up by a vast fuchsia, which still waved its long flexilebranches in the air laden with crimson bells. In front of the housestood a great ash, dear northern tree which does not disdain the rainsand winds. Its sweeping boughs stood out against the huge hill opposite,which was the background of the whole landscape. The blue water gleamedand shone beneath that natural canopy. Mrs. Murray's large high-backedeasy-chair was placed by the side of the fire, so that she had fullcommand of the view. The gable window with its fuchsia bush was behindher. Never, except for a few months, during her whole seventy years oflife, had she been out of sight of that hill. She seated herself in thestillness of age, and looked out wistfully upon the familiar scene. Dayby day through all her lifetime, across her own homely table with itscrimson cover, across the book she was reading or the stocking she wasknitting, under the green arch of the ash-branches, she had seen thewater break, sometimes with foaming wrath, sometimes quietly as a summerbrook, upon the huge foot of that giant hill. Was this now to be over?The noiseless tears of old age came into her eyes."We'll aye have the sky, Jeanie, wherever we go," she said, softly; "andbefore long, before long, the gates of gold will have to open for me.""But no for me," said Jeanie, seating herself on a stool by hergrandmother's side. The little girlish face was flashing and shiningwith some illumination more subtle than that of the firelight. "We cannadie when we will, Granny, you've often said that; and sometimes," thegirl added shyly, "we might not wish if we would."This brought the old woman back from her momentary reverie."God forbid!" she cried, putting her hand on Jeanie's golden locks;"though Heaven will scarce be Heaven without you, Jeanie. God forbid!No, my bonnie lamb, I have plenty there without you. There's yourfather, and his mother, and my ain little angel Jeanie with the goldlocks like you ---- her that I have told you of so often. She was youngerthan you are, just beginning to be a blessing and a comfort, when, youmind?--oh, so often as I have told you!--on the Saturday after the newyear--""I mind," said Jeanie softly, holding the withered hand in both of hers;"but, granny, even you, though you're old, you cannot make sure thatyou'll die when you want to die.""No; more's the pity; though it's a thankless thing--a thankless thingto say.""You canna die when you will," repeated Jeanie. "Wasna your fatherninety, granny, and Aunty Jean a hundred? Granny, listen to me. You mustdo what he says.""He, Jeanie?""Ay, he. I might say his name if there were two like him in the world,"said Jeanie, with enthusiasm. "It's your pride that will not let himserve you as he says. It would make him happy. I saw it in his kinde'en. I was watching him while he was speaking to you. It was like thelight and the shadows over Benvohrlan. The brightness glinted up whenhe spoke, and when you said 'No,' granny, the cloud came over. Oh, howcould you set your face against him? The only one of us a' (you say) youever did an ill turn to; and him the only one to bring you back good,and comfort, and succour.""Jeanie, you must not blame the rest," said the old woman. "They have nosiller to give me. They would take me into their houses. What more couldthey do? No, Jeanie; you may be just to him, and yet no cruel to them.Besides, poor lad," said Mrs. Murray with a sigh, "he has a rich man'sways, though he's rich no more.""He has the kindest ways in all the world," cried Jeanie. "Granny,you'll do what he says."The old woman leant back in her chair, crossing her thin hands in herlap; her musing eyes sought the hills outside and the gleam of thewater, her old, old counsellors, not the anxious face of the child ather feet. She was but a farmer's wife, a farmer herself, a lowly, homelywoman; but many a princess was less proud. She sat and looked at theblue loch, and thought of the long succession of years in which she hadreigned as a queen in this humble house, a centre of beneficence, givingto all. She had never shut her heart against the cry of the poor, shewho was poor herself; she had brought up children, she had entertainedstrangers, she had done all that reigning princesses could do. For fortyyears all who had any claim on her kindness had come to herunhesitatingly in every strait. Silver and gold she had little, buteverything else she gave, the shelter of her house, her best efforts,her ready counsel, her unfailing help. All this she had bestowedmunificently in her day; and now--had she come to the point when shemust confess that her day was over, when she must retire from her place,giving way to others, and become dependent--she who had always been thehead of her house? I do not say that the feelings in the mind of thisold Sovereign about to be dethroned were entirely without admixture ofignoble sentiment. It went to her heart to be dethroned. She said toherself, with a proud attempt at philosophy, that it was the naturalfate, and that everything was as it ought to be. She tried to persuadeherself that a chair in the chimney-corner was all the world hadhenceforth for her, and that her daughter and her daughter's husbandwould be kind--enough. But it went to her heart. She was making up hermind to it as men make up their minds to martyrdom; and the effort wasbitter. I do not know whether it ever occurred to her painfully that sheherself, had she been in the fulness of her powers, would never havesuffered her old mother to be driven from that homely roof which sheloved--or if something whispered in her soul that she had done better byher children than they were doing by her; but if such thoughts arose inher mind, she dismissed them unembodied, with an exercise of her will,which was as proud as it was strong. Her very pride prevented her fromassuming even to herself the appearance of a victim. "It is but thenatural end," she said, stoically, trying to look her trouble in theface. She was ready to accept it as the inevitable, rather than own toherself that her children failed in their duty--rather than feel, muchless admit, that she had expected more of them than they were willing togive.The cause of this deep but undisclosed pain was, that things had beengoing badly for some time with the Castle Farm. Mrs. Murray herself wasgrowing old, and less strong than is necessary for a farmer, and she hadbeen absent for some time, a few years before, an absence which hadwrought much trouble in the homestead. These misfortunes had beencomplicated, as was inevitable, by one or two cold springs and wetautumns. It was October now, and the harvest was but accomplishingitself slowly even on the level fields on the loch side. The higherlying acres of corn land still lay in sickly yellow patches on the braesbehind the house, half-ripened, damp and sprouting, sodden with many arain-storm; a great part of the corn would be fit for nothing butfodder, and what remained for the woman-farmer, unable to cope withthese difficulties as she once had done, before strength and couragefailed--what remained for her to do? She had made up her mind to abandonthe old house she loved--to sell all her belongings, the soft-eyed cowswhom she called by their names, and who came at her call likechildren--and the standing crops, the farm implements, even her oldfurniture, to denude herself of everything, and pay her debts, andcommit the end of her life to Providence. This had been the state ofaffairs when she fell ill, and Edgar Earnshaw was summoned to come toher, to receive her blessing and farewell. But then, in contradiction toall her wishes, to all that was seemly and becoming, she did not die.When she knew she was to get better, the old woman broke forth intocomplainings such as had never been heard from her lips in her worstmoments. "To lead me forth so far on the way, and then to send me backwhen the worst was over--me that must make the journey so soon, thatmust begin all over again, maybe the morn!" she cried, with bitter tearsin her eyes. But Heaven's decree is inexorable, whether it be for lifeor death, and she had to consent to recover. It was then that Edgar, hergrandson, had made the proposal to settle upon her a little income whichhe possessed, and which would secure her a peaceful end to her days inher old home. That he should do this had filled her with poignantemotions of joy and shame. The only one of her kith and kin whom she hadwronged, and he was the one to make her this amends. If she accepted it,she would retain all that she desired--everything that was personallyimportant to her in this life. But she would denude him of his living.He was young, learned (as she thought), accomplished (as she thought),able "to put his hand to anything," doubtless able to earn a great dealmore than that, did he choose to try. It might even be for hisadvantage, as he said, to have the spur of necessity to force him intoexertion. All this was mingled together in her mind, the noble andgenerous feeling that would rather suffer than harm another, rather diethan blame, mixed with sharp stings of pride and some sophistries ofargument by which she tried to persuade herself against her conscienceto do what she wished. The struggle was going on hotly, as she sat byher homely fireside and gazed out at the loch, and the shadow of the bigash, which seemed to shadow over all Benvohrlan; things which are closeat hand are so much bigger and more imposing than things afar.CHAPTER II.Edgar.Edgar set off on a brisk walk up the loch when he parted from the twowomen at the door of the farmhouse. The previous history of this youngman had been an extraordinary one, and has had its record elsewhere; butas it is not to be expected that any--even the gentlest reader--couldremember a story told them several years ago, I will brieflyrecapitulate its chief incidents. Till he was five-and-twenty, thisyoung man had known himself only as the heir of a great estate, and ofan old and honourable name, and for some few months he had been inactual possession of all the honours he believed his own. He was a greatEnglish squire, one of the most important men in his district, with anonly sister, to whom he was deeply attached, and no drawback in his lifeexcept the mysterious fact, which no longer affected him except as apainful recollection, that his father, during his lifetime, had banishedhim from his home, and apparently regarded him with a sentiment morelike hatred than affection. But Clare his sister loved him, and Edgar,on coming to his fortune, had begun to form friendships and attachmentsof his own, and had been drawn gently and pleasantly--not fallen wildlyand vehemently--into love with the daughter of one of his nearneighbours, Augusta (better known as Gussy) Thornleigh, whom he was onthe very eve of asking to be his wife, when his whole existence, name,and identity were suddenly altered by the discovery that he was aninnocent impostor, and had no right to any of the good things heenjoyed. I do not attempt to repeat any description of the change thusmade, for it was beyond description--terrible, complete, andoverwhelming. It plunged him out of wealth and honours into indigenceand shame--shame not merited, but yet clinging to the victim of along-continued deception. It not only took from him all his hopes, butit embittered his very recollections. He lost past, and present, andfuture, all at a blow. His identity, and all the outward apparel of lifeby which he had known himself, were taken from him. Not only was thegirl whom he loved hopelessly lost to him, but she who had been hissister, his only relative, as he supposed, and his dearest companion,became nothing to him--a stranger, and worse than a stranger--for theman whom she loved and married was his enemy. And in place of thesefamiliar figures, there came a crowd of shadows round him who were hisreal relations, his unknown family, to whom, and not to the Ardens, henow belonged. This fatal and wonderful change was made all the harder tohim from the fact that he was thus transplanted into an altogether lowerlevel, and that his new family was little elevated above the class fromwhich he had been in the habit of drawing his servants, not hisfriends. Their habits, their modes of speech, their ways of thinking,were all strange to him. It is true that he accommodated himself readilyto these differences, as exhibited in the old grandmother whom I havejust presented to the reader, and the gentle, soft-voiced, poeticJeanie; but with the other members of his new family, poor Edgar hadfelt all his powers of self-control fail him. Their presence, theircontact, their familiarity, and the undeniable fact that it was to themand their sphere that he actually belonged was terrible to the youngman, who, in his better days, had not known what pride meant. Life is inreality so much the same in all classes that no doubt he would have cometo perceive the identity of substance notwithstanding the difference ofform, had he not been cast so suddenly into this other phase ofexistence without preparation, without anything to break the fall; butas it was, he had no preparation, and the blow went to his heart.This fall had taken place nearly three years before the time at whichthis story opens, and poor Edgar, stunned by his overthrow, repelled byhis new relatives, vaguely wretched, notwithstanding the stoutness ofheart with which he had braced himself to meet calamity, had done butlittle with his life for these two years. A small provision had beensecured for him from his successor in the estates of Arden, the rightfulheir whom he had unwittingly wronged, and to whom he did instant justiceas soon as he heard of the wrong; and this little provision had beenaugmented by the small property of the Rector of Arden, Mr. Fielding,who had left him everything he possessed. He had thus enough to supporthim, that most dangerous of all endowments for a young man. Poor fellow!he had made his sacrifice with great bravery, and had wrenched himselfaway from all he cared for with the smile of a hero, neither sinkingunder the blow, nor exaggerating its force. "Courage!" he had said tohimself, when he lost the place where he had been lord and master, andwent forth poor, humble, and nameless, to face the world. He meantnothing less than to make a new life for himself better than the last,to assert the superiority of a guiltless heart and free conscience overfate. But, alas, it is so easy to do this in the general, so difficultin detail! "We will make our lives sublime," says the poet, with suchcheap magniloquence--and how many an enthusiast youth has delightedhimself with the thought!Edgar was a very sensible, reasonable young fellow, but yet it was aconsolation to him, in his sudden fall, to reflect that every man mayconquer circumstances, and that will and energy are better than riches.He had dreamt of "doing something," if not to make himself known andfamous, at least to be of use in this life to his fellow-creatures andto himself. He meant it firmly up to the day when he left everything heknew or cared for, and he meant it the next day, and the day after, andeven the next year; but up to this moment he had done nothing. For afterall what was there to do?Young Paladins cannot kill fiery dragons, cannot meet giants in singlecombat, cannot deliver a whole district now-a-days by the stroke of asword. To be sure, a man whose tastes lie that way may tackle the giant,Sewage, or attack the dragon, Ignorance; but that is slow work, seldomof a primitive, straightforward kind, and leading the fighter into manyentanglements, dubious company, and very uncertain results. So theconsequence was that poor Edgar meaning to do much, did nothing--notbecause he loved idleness, but because he did not know what to do. Hewandered off abroad very soon disgusted with everything; with hisdownfall and his inability to surmount that downfall; with the meannessof estimating worth by rank and wealth, and the still greater meannessof his own incapacity to get quite free from that standard, which, solong as he was himself rich and great, he had disowned manfully.Cheerily he had laughed at the frivolity of the young men of fashionsurrounding him when he was as they, but his laugh now had a certainbitterness, and he felt himself turn with a sickening of the heart fromintercourse with a lower class, and then deeply and bitterly despisedhimself for this ignoble sentiment. His state of mind, indeed, thoughstrange and miserable to himself, was no more than was natural and to belooked for in a man forcibly transplanted from the place of his naturalgrowth, and from all the habits and traditions of his previous life.Therefore, these three years had been a failure with Edgar. He had donenothing with them, he who had gone out of his old existence firmlydetermined to do so much. He had wandered about over the face of theearth, to and fro, an unquiet spirit--but no good had come from any ofhis wanderings. He could not help being kind and charitable; it was novirtue on his part, but "just a carnal inclination;" and except thisinevitable goodness, which was an affair of temperament, nothing hadcome of him, nothing had come from him, in these years.Thus, probably, he would have continued, if not always, until wearinesshad come on, and his vital strength was broken. He would have become,without vice, one of the thousand English vagabonds of quality who hauntevery thoroughfare in Europe; and what a downfall would this have beenfor Edgar!--a greater downfall even than that which circumstances hadbrought upon him. The sudden summons which had brought him to Mrs.Murray's sick-bed, the sudden call upon his charity, socharacteristically adapted to move him, arrested him in the painfulinsignificance of this career. He had resolved to make the sacrificewhich was involved, before it even occurred to him how much thatsacrifice would involve; for he was of that species of humankind which,bestowing help and succour does first and considers afterwards. It costhim no struggle, no conflict with himself, to decide that everything hehad must go at once to the aid of his mother's mother, to herpreservation in comfort--notwithstanding that she had wronged him, andthat the tragic confusion and aimlessness of his life was her fault. Hehad taken all the steps at once which were necessary to carry out thistransfer, and it was only now, when he had fully resolved upon it, thatthe cost to himself occurred to him. He counted that cost as he walked,stepping out as if he trod on air to the head of the loch.What would it cost him? It would take away all his certain living, everypenny he had; it would force him to work one way or another in order tomaintain himself. After his brief experience of wealth and its ways, andafter the vague and unsatisfactory existence which he had led when hehad just "enough to live on," he must make a fresh start again, like anycountry lad setting forth to seek his fortune. The third start, he saidto himself, with a certain rueful amusement; for Edgar was one of thosewho could laugh at his own misfortunes. I cannot tell how it was thatthis prospect did not discourage him, but certainly it did not; acertain exhilaration crept into his soul as he faced the wind, walkingfast with joyous defiance. The third time of beginning must be lucky atlast; was it not a mystical number, acknowledged by the very children intheir games? He had heard an urchin assuring another that very morningthat "the third ca' was canny." It was poor Edgar's third trial. Thefirst time he had been foiled by no fault of his--by arbitrarycircumstances. The second time he had foiled himself by want of purpose,absence of anything direct to do, and languor of motive for attemptinganything. But the third ca' would be canny--nature and necessity wouldhelp him. He would be driven to work by infallible potency of need, andhe would make something of it; so he said to himself.There was something exhilarating in the day, or else he thought so. Thehigh wind was of itself a blessing after days of that weary rain, whichis so common in the west of Scotland. The damp corn out on the fields,the still damper corn which stood in faint whiteness upon the hillsidewas shaking off some part of its superabundant moisture in the cheerfulbreeze. The white clouds were scudding over the mountains, throwing apoetic and perpetual interchange of light and shade over those silentspectators who occupied so large a share in the landscape, and whosesudden glories and brightness gave a human aspect to their everlastingstrength. The deep blue of the distance, deep, and dark, and dreamy,against the open of the lighter sky; the thousand soft tones of purple,of grey, of brown, and soft green; the whiteness of a sudden peakstarting into sunshine; the dark unfathomable depth of water, acrosswhich a sudden shadow would fall dramatically like an event, made eventhe silent country a partaker in the commotion which filled the youngman's mind.In this dramatic tumult of the elements, there was no knoll, no hollow,no tree, which had not its share. And in the midst of the animatedscene, a sudden rush of alien sound, the rustle and sputter andcommotion of the little steamer fretting its busy, fussy way to the headof the loch, which was the chief medium of communication with theoutside world, struck upon Edgar's ear with not unpleasant discord. Itwas work, it was life, it was the labour by which a man could live andserve his generation, that was embodied to him in this little noisyinterruption which he had so often condemned as alien to the scene. Yes,it was alien to the scene. But to be reminded of the world without, ofthe noise, and movement, and high-pressure of life, was pleasant toEdgar at this moment of his existence; it helped to stimulate the thrillof new energy which seemed to be rising in his heart.There was, however, a motive less elevated which, I am bound to admit,affected the young man in his toleration of the steamer and its discord.He was eager to get away from Loch Arroch back into the world, where, atleast, he would escape from the contemplation of that contrast betweenhis present and his past, which was forced upon him here. All theconfusion of his life, its conflicts between the sentiments which hefelt he ought to entertain and those which, in spite of him, cameuppermost in his mind, were kept painfully and constantly before hiseyes. Every detail of the homely farmhouse existence brought them beforehim. The chief sting in all this was his vexation with himself forfeeling these details to be of importance. Had he retained his originalposition, so little affected was he really by external circumstances,that I believe he would have found the life at the Castle Farminfinitely more reasonable, sensible, and natural than that which, as aman of fortune and fashion, he would himself have been compelled tolead, The simple fare, the plain rooms, the absence of luxuries, andeven some of those everyday luxuries which we call comforts, did notreally distress him; it was the sense of missing them, the quick andvivid consciousness of this and that a-wanting, which made the young mansore, and bitter, and ashamed of himself. And he felt in his heart thateverything would be easier to him when he could but get away. I mustadd, however, that Edgar never showed his consciousness of the change ofsphere to others, deeply as he felt it. The farmhouse servant, andlittle Jeanie, and even old Mrs. Murray herself, who had more insight,considered him much more "easy to please" than any other man of thekindred. "He gives just nae trouble," Bell said, "and aye a 'thank you,Bell,' for every hand's turn I do for him. Eh! when it's JohnnieCampbell that's i' the house, ye can see the difference. It's Bell here,and Bell there, like as I had nothing a do but wait upon him. But it's apleasure to serve Mr. Edgar, night or day."This was the testimony of one very clear-sighted witness; and even Mrs.Murray concluded, with a relief which it would have been impossible toput into words, that the change had passed lightly over her grandson'shead without affecting him. "He has one of those blessed natures thatare aye content, and take everything easy from the hand of God," shesaid to herself, with a mixture of joy and disappointment; for thisblessed nature, blessed as it is, is secretly looked down upon bypersons conscious of more acute feeling. I believe my good Edgar hadthus something in his character of what is commonly called humbug. Hedeceived people as to his own feelings by very consideration for theirfeelings. It was so absolutely indispensable to his being to set hiscompanions at their ease, and make them comfortable so far as he could,that he took them in habitually, to use another vulgar expression, andwas believed by everybody to be as happy as the day was long at LochArroch, while all the while he was secretly longing to get away. Ibelieve that in some respects this kind of nature (not a very commonone) is less good, being less honest, than that more general dispositionwhich, when uncomfortable or dissatisfied itself, loses no opportunityof making others so, and states its sentiments frankly, whether they arelikely to please its companions or not. I allow that Edgar's specialpeculiarities had their disadvantages. I do not attempt to excuse him, Ionly state what they were.Just as he came in sight of Loch Arroch head--the village which, seatedat the extremity of the loch, was the post town and general centre ofthe district--Edgar was joined by Robert Campbell, the husband of hiseldest aunt, a man to whom he was expected to give the title of uncle,and who regarded him with a mingled feeling of rough amity, respect(for, was he not independent, with an income of his own, and able tolive like a gentleman?), and conscientious conviction that somethingmight be got out of him. He was a land-agent, in not a very great way, afactor for some of the less important land-owners of the district, a mannot without education and information in his way, with considerablepractical knowledge of law, and still greater of agriculture, racy ofthe soil, the sort of person whom a great landed proprietor fromEngland, such as poor Edgar had been a few years before, would haveappreciated mightily, and quoted for months after their meeting. But toenjoy the shrewdness and profit by the conversation of such anindividual, when you are elevated a whole world above him,--and to takehim into your heart as one of your own relatives, are very differentthings. Edgar shrank with a whimsical sense of moral cowardice as he sawthis personage approaching. He laughed ruefully at himself. "Oh, why areuncles made so coarse, and nephews made so fine?" he said. But to seethe fun of a situation does not always enable you to bear it withequanimity. He would have been very glad to get out of Robert Campbell'sway had that been possible; but as it was not possible he did his bestto meet him with a smile."How's the auld leddy the day?" said Campbell, stretching out a hugehand to grasp Edgar's; "living, and like to live, I'll be bound. Wemaunna grumble, for she's given an aixcellent constitution to herdescendants, of which my lad is one as well as you. But, puir body, ifit had been the Almighty's will--lang life's a grand thing when you'rewell provided for," Mr. Campbell concluded, with a sigh."I hope none of her descendants will grudge her the little she wants,"Edgar began--"Saftly, saftly, my man! nobody grudges her the little she wants. Thedifficulty is, wha's to provide that little," said Campbell. "We're alldecently well off in one sense, with no scrimping of meal or milk and agood suit of black for a Sunday or a funeral, and a silk gown for thewife. But to keep up a farm upon our joint contributions, as I hear iswhat you're thinking of--a farm, the chanciest thing in creation!--Iallow I canna see my way to that. Excuse me, Mr. Edgar, for speaking mymind, but you're young, and your notions are too grand for the like ofus--I'm no saying it's your fault. We maun cut our coat according to ourcloth. I'm no fond of relations in the house; but she's a harmless body,and I'll stretch a point for once: and John Bryce, in Sauchiehall St.,will take Jeanie. He's a man in a very decent way of business, and I'veno doubt he could make her useful in the shop.""But cannot you see," cried Edgar, with a start and sudden wince,interrupting him, "that my poor old grandmother would be wretchedwithout Jeanie? And Jeanie herself is too delicate a creature for anysuch life. They must stay together. Surely, surely," cried the youngman, "when she is helpless who has done so much for everybody, it is nottoo much that we should provide for something beyond her mereexistence--her happiness as well."Campbell had watched him very closely while he made this speech. Thegenerous feeling with which he spoke brought the colour to Edgar'scheek; he was unsuspicious of the meaning of the close scrutiny to whichhe was thus subjected, and made no effort to conceal this glow ofnatural emotion."If it's Jeanie you're meaning," said Campbell, with a laugh andsignificant look, "no doubt there are other arrangements that might bethought of; and a good man's aye the best thing, especially when he hasenough to live on. If that's your thought, my lad, I am not the one tosay you nay.""If what is my thought?" said Edgar, bewildered.I do not think the idea had ever occurred to him before, and I cannotdescribe the thrill of wounded pride with which he received this shock.Jeanie! A child--a creature altogether out of his sphere. Jeanie! withher pretty peasant manners, and poetic homely dialect, a little girlwhom he could be kind to, as he would be kind to the maid who milked thecows, or the child who ran his errands! In all the course of the threepainful years that were past, I do not think Edgar had received any suchcutting and sudden blow. He realized all his own humiliation when he sawhimself placed in the imagination of the neighbourhood by littleJeanie's side--her cousin, her often companion, her so-possible wooer!The thought stiffened him up all at once to stone. He forgot even hisusual consideration for the feelings of others."I have no thought of any kind in respect to Jeanie," he said, coldly,"except in so far as concerns my grandmother. The two ought not to beseparated. I cannot indeed allow them to be separated," he added, stillmore proudly. "I have a little money, as you know, and if nobody elsewill do it, I must do it. I will make over to my grandmother my littleincome, such as it is. She can live and keep her favourite with her, ifshe has that.""Your--income!" Mr. Campbell could scarcely gasp out the words, sobreathless was he and dumb-foundered. "Your--income! And what will youdo yoursel'? But you mean an allowance; that's a different matter," headded, recovering himself. "You'll give in proportion to what the restof us give? Ay, ay. I can understand that."CHAPTER III.Jeanie.Edgar did not come home till the evening was considerably advanced. Hewent with Campbell to his house, and partook of the substantial familytea in the best parlour, which Mrs. Campbell, his aunt, called thedrawing-room--so that it was late before he returned home."There's a moon," Campbell said. "Ye need be in no hurry. A young fellowin certain states of mind, as we a' know, takes to moonlight walks likea duck to the water."At which speech Mrs. Campbell laughed, being evidently in the secret;but John, the only son, who was a student at the University of Glasgow,and just about to set out for the winter session, looked black andfierce as any mountain storm. These inferences of some supposedsentiment, which he was totally ignorant of, might have passed quiteinnocuously over Edgar only a day before, but they filled him now withsuppressed rage and deep mortification. Perhaps unreasonably; but thereis nothing which a man resents so much as to be supposed "in love" withsome one whom he considers beneath him. Even when there is truth in thesupposition, he resents the discovery which brings all theinappropriateness of the conjunction before his mind; and if there is notruth in it, he feels himself injured in the tenderest point--ill-used,humbled, wronged. Edgar's impulse was to leave the house where he wasthus insulted by inference; but partly pride, partly his usual deferenceto other people's feelings, and partly the necessity which was nowstronger than ever of carrying out his intentions and leaving the placewhere he was subject to such an insane suggestion triumphed over hisfirst impulse.Even Campbell was staggered in his vulgar notion that only Jeanie andher fresh beauty could account for the young man's prolonged stay andunusual devotion, when he began to perceive the munificence of Edgar'sintentions. A young man who wanted to marry might indeed be guilty of agreat many foolishnesses; he might be ready, Mr. Campbell thought, toburden himself with the old mother for the sake of the pretty child; butto alienate a portion of his income (for Edgar did not enter fully intohis plan) was a totally different and quite impossible sort ofsacrifice. What could be his motive? Was it that Jeanie might beeducated and made a lady of before he should marry her? As for pure dutytowards the old mother, honour of her long and virtuous life, compassionfor the downfall of so proud a spirit, being motives strong enough forsuch a sacrifice, at this the worthy man guffawed loudly."I'm no the man to be taken in with fine words," he said, with a broadsmile.While these jokes and discussions were going on in the best parlour atLoch Arroch Head, Jeanie, unconscious of any debate in which her namecould be involved, went about her usual occupations at home. She got thetea ready, coming and going with soft steps from the parlour to thekitchen, carrying in the tray, and "masking" the tea with her own hands.As for Bell, she was "suppering" the kye, and looking after the outdoorwork, and had no time for such daintier service. Jeanie would steal amoment now and then, while she prepared this simple meal, to stepnoiselessly to the ever open door, and cast a wistful look up theloch-side to see "if he was coming." The gloaming grew darker anddarker, the stars came out over the hill, the moon rose, and stillJeanie strained her eyes to see if any figure approached on the longline of almost level road by the side of the loch. Once her heart leapedup, thinking she saw him; but it was only a shearer taking his way homefrom the West Park, where, taking advantage of a good day, the harvesthad gone on as long as the light permitted. Poor Jeanie! what adifference there was between this heavy rustic form as it drew near,relieved against the dark yet gleaming water of the loch, and the erect,light-footed, elastic figure she looked for! As she washed the old chinacups brought out in his honour, and put the tea-things away, shewondered with a pang in her kind little heart what could have kept him?Had he met some of his grand friends, sportsmen arriving by the boat, orthose tourists whom the natives looked upon with mingled admiration andscorn? or could any accident have happened? a thought which blanched herpretty cheek with fear.She would have liked to talk to her grandmother about Edgar, but she didnot venture to do more than wonder "what could be keeping him?" aquestion to which Mrs. Murray responded placidly that no doubt he was"drinking tea" with somebody at Loch Arroch Head. The old lady was notdiscomposed by Edgar's absence as Jeanie was; and poor Jeanie, in theflutter and warmth of her feelings, could have cried with vexation atthe contrast between her own agitated heart and this calm, which shethought indifference. Her grandmother "did not care." "Oh, how could shehelp caring, and him so good to her!" poor Jeanie said to herself. AndBell went about her work out of doors, cheerily singing, in her fullrustic voice, as she prepared the supper for the kye, and carried it outto the byre, coming and going in her strong shoes, with clink of pails,and loud talking now and then to Sandy, who was helping. Nobody caredbut Jeanie that he was so late of coming home.Then she went upstairs with her grandmother, who was still an invalid,and helped her to bed, and read "the chapter" with which the day wasalways concluded; and put a great old stick, with a gold head, which hadbelonged to some ancestor, by the bedside, in order that Mrs. Murray, ifshe wanted anything, should "knock down," for there were not many bellsin the little farmhouse. The sitting-room was immediately below, andthis was the recognised way at the Castle Farm of calling for theattendants. When this last duty was done, Jeanie was free for the nightto "take her book" or "her seam," and do as she pleased, for she hadnever had anything to do with "the beasts" or outdoor matters.By this time Bell had finished with her clinking pails. She was in thekitchen, still moving about, frying the cold potatoes into a savourymess, with which Sandy and she were about to regale themselves. WhereBell's strong shoes were, and her hearty voice, not to speak of Sandy's,which was very deep bass, there could scarcely be stillness in thehouse; but when the kitchen door was closed, and the two (who weresweethearts) talked lower, the spell of the quiet grew strong uponJeanie. She put down her seam, and stole out very quietly to the door,which still stood innocently open; for at the Castle Farm they feared noevil. If you could but have seen her, no prettier figure ever watchedfor a tardy lover. She was dressed in a plain little brown frock,without any furbelows, with a little rim of white collar round her neck.Her golden hair was fastened up with a large tortoise-shell comb,thought "very old-fashioned" by all the girls about Loch Arroch, whichhad belonged to Jeanie's mother, and of which, as a valuable article,costing originally "more than a pound-note," as her grandmother hadoften told her, Jeanie was proud. The comb was scarcely visible in thesoft bright mass of hair, which Jeanie had not neglected to twist up inits abundance into some semblance of "the fashion." She leant againstthe doorway with her chin propped in the hollow of her hand, and onefolded arm supporting the elbow of the other.The stars shone high over head, high up above the big summit ofBenvohrlan, which shut out from her half the heavens. The moon wasbehind, silvering over the red roof of the house, and falling gloriousupon the dark water, making it one sheet of silver from where it openedout of the bigger loch up to the very foot of the mountain. The side ofBenvohrlan was almost as light as in the day-time, and Loch Long on theother turn of the gigantic corner formed by the hill, went gleaming awayinto invisible space, betraying itself in undefinable distance by hereand there a line or speck of silver. All up the loch side, at Jeanie'sleft hand, the path lay clear and vacant, without a shadow on it. On theother side, the glimmering lightness of the stubble field, with itssheaves looking like strange animals in the moonlight, extended to thewater edge, rounding out to where it too gained the margin of the parentloch. I do not know any finer combination of hill and water. The levelfields of the Castle Farm on one side, and Big Benvohrlan on the other,form the doorway by which the lesser loch enters the greater; on oneside an angle of cultivated land: on the other a gigantic angle ofmountain. But little Jeanie thought little of the familiar scene aroundher. The moon, newly risen, cast a soft shadow of her little figure, thesame way as her heart went, upon the road from the loch-head by whichEdgar was coming. He saw this shadow with a little impatient vexation ashe approached the house, but not till long after little Jeanie's hearthad jumped to perceive him.Poor little gentle soul! her large eyes made larger and softer still byher wistful anxiety and longing for his presence, had watched withpatience unwavering for more than an hour. She had not minded the chillwind nor the weariness of standing so long, with no support but thedoorway. The attitude, the strained look, the patience, were allcharacteristic of Jeanie. She was the kind of being which in allsecond-rate poetry, and most second-rate imaginations, is the one soletype of woman. Looking for some one who was the lord of her life, orlooking to some one--with soft eyes intent, with quick ears waiting,with gentle heart ready to receive whatever impression he wished toconvey, the soft soul turned to the man who had caught her heart or herimagination as the flower turns to the sun. To use the jargon of theday, poor little Jeanie was receptive to the highest degree. She neveroriginated anything, nor advised anything, nor took any part as anindividual being in the conduct of life, either her own or that ofothers. Hers were not those eager youthful opinions, those harshjudgments, those daring comments which belong as much to youth as itsbloom. She was too artless to know anything of the prettiness of heruplifted eyes, or the delicious flattery which lay in her absolutesubmissiveness. Poor Jeanie did not know that these were charms muchmore potent than the talents which she was aware she did not possess.She listened, and looked, and watched for those signs of guidance, whichshe obeyed by instinct with the docility of a dumb creature, because itwas her nature. She did not even intend to please; though she was happybeyond description when she found that she had pleased, she did but actas she could not help acting, according as her disposition moved her.Edgar, who had not been used to this kind of woman, had been halfannoyed, half amused by her powerlessness to advise or help, her softdevotion of look, now addressed to himself, now to Mrs. Murray. He hadwondered at it, and objected to it; yet he had been moved like any otherman to a softening sense of protection and almost tenderness. He wasflattered too in spite of himself to find her thus watching for him. Itmade him more than half angry, but yet it pleased him involuntarily."You will catch cold standing out here in the night air," he saidpettishly at the first moment. Then he added with compunction, "It iskind of you to look for me, Jeanie; but you should not stand out in thecold without a shawl.""I'm glad you're come home," said Jeanie, with instinctive policyignoring this reproof. "Grannie is in her bed, and it is lonely withoutyou. Will I make you some tea? or will you have your supper? You've beenlong away.""Not so very long," said Edgar, touched by the soft complaint, "but Iought to have recollected that you were alone. Are you afraid, Jeanie,at night with no one but Bell and the granny to take care of you? It isa lonely house.""Oh, no," said Jeanie, looking brightly round upon him, as he followedher into the low parlour, where two candles were flickering on the tablebefore the fire."But it is a lonely house?""Oh, yes," she repeated softly, "but what o' that? Nobody would meddlewith us. Granny is as well known as Loch Arroch Kirk. Nobody daresmeddle with us. I'm never lonely, except when granny is ill and goes toher bed, and I can hear Bell and Sandy in the kitchen. That makes methink I would like somebody to speak to, too.""But Bell and Sandy,"--Edgar began: if he was going to be so incautiousas to add,--"are sweethearts," I don't know what would have become ofhim; but happily Jeanie, with a sudden blush interposed."I was not meaning Bell and Sandy; any voices have the same sound. Theymake you feel how lone you are.""That is true," said Edgar, seating himself by the fire, which Jeaniehad kept bright, with a clean-swept hearth, and a clear red glow for hiscoming. He sat down meditatively in the old mother's chair. "That istrue," he repeated slowly, "I have felt it often of winter nights when Ihave gone upstairs to my chilly room, and heard the people chattingtogether as I passed their doors.""You have felt that, too?" said Jeanie timidly, with reverentialwonder, "but you need never be your lane unless you like.""I assure you I have often been 'my lane,' as you call it, when I didnot like at all," said Edgar smiling, "you have much too high anopinion, Jeanie, of what I can do 'if I like.'""Oh, no," said Jeanie, "you are not the same as the like of us; you area man, which is a great difference,--and then you're a grand gentleman.""Jeanie, my foolish little Jeanie! I am your cousin and your granny'schild like you," he cried, putting his hand upon hers, to stop her inthe little outburst of innocent enthusiasm, which was, he felt, for anideal Edgar--not for him."It's very hard to understand," said Jeanie shaking her head softly witha little sigh, "why you should be yonder the greatest of the land, andnow only granny's son, like me. I'll no try. When I think, I get back apain in my head like what I had--when I was ill.""You must not think," said Edgar, "but, Jeanie, tell me, did you do mycommission? Did you persuade granny to let me do what I wish?""Yes," said Jeanie eagerly; she came forward and stood by him in thepleasure of making this report of her own faithfulness,--and thecheerful ruddy gleam of the firelight flickered about her, shining inher hair and eyes, and adding a tint to the colour on her cheek, whichwas pale by nature. "I told her a' you said, I did not miss a word. Isaid it would be fine for her, but better for you; that you would dosomething then, and now you were doing nothing; and that you would beglad aye to think of Loch Arroch, and that there was a house there whereyou were thought upon day and night, and named in a' the prayers, andminded, whatever you did, and whatever we did.""That was your own, Jeanie," said Edgar, taking her hand, and looking upat her with gratified tenderness. She was to him as a little sister, andher affectionate half-childish enthusiasm brought a suffusion to hiseyes."If it was, may I no say what I think--me too?" said Jeanie, with modestgrace. "I told her that you couldna bear the thought of her away inanother man's house, after so long keeping her own over a' our heads,that the siller was nothing to you, but that her--and me--were somethingto you, your nearest friends in this world. Eh, I'm glad we're yournearest friends! though it's strange, strange to think of," said Jeanie,in a parenthesis. "I told her that though she couldna work and I couldnawork, you could work, and win a fortune if you liked. I did not forget asingle word," cried the girl, "not a word! I told her all you said."For a moment Edgar made no reply. He listened with a half smile,wonderingly endeavouring to put himself in the place of this limited yetclear intelligence, which was capable of stating his own generousarguments so fully, yet incapable, as it seemed, of so much reflectionas would make her hesitate to expound them. Jeanie, so far as herpersonal sentiment went, accepted his sacrifice with matter-of-factsimplicity, without ever thinking of his side of it, or of thedeprivations involved. She took his offer to denude himself ofeverything he had, with the same absolute pleasure and satisfaction withwhich a child would accept a present. Was it her unbounded confidence inhis power to win a fortune if he liked? Or was it her simple instinctthat this was natural, and that the weak and helpless had a right to theservices of the strong? Edgar was bewildered by this question whichnever entered into Jeanie's mind. He was almost glad of her incapacityto see beyond the surface of things, and yet wondered at it withsomething between amusement and pain. Here was the primitive nature,commonplace, unsophisticated, he said to himself, which believed whatwas said to it simply demanding without motive or reason. No secondthoughts troubled the limpid surface of Jeanie's gentle mind. Shebelieved unhesitatingly not only that he meant what he said (which wastrue), but that the arguments she repeated were infallible, withoutperceiving the sophistry of which Edgar himself, the author of them, wasfully conscious. Truly and sincerely she made as light of hisself-renunciation as he himself had made--a thing which is bewilderingto the self-sacrificer, though it may be the thing which is mostdesirable to him and suits his purpose best. I do not know if Jeanie wasaware of the half tone of descent in the moral scale which made itselfapparent in Edgar's voice."You have been a clever advocate, Jeanie," he said with a smile, "and Ihope a successful one," and with that he dropped her hand and took outhis newspaper. Was there anything amiss, or was it merely his lordlypleasure to end the conversation? With a momentary sense of pain, Jeaniewondered which it was, but accepted the latter explanation, got herseam, and sat down within reach of the pleasant warmth of the fire,happy in the silence, asking nothing more.CHAPTER IV.A Family Consultation.A few days after, various members of the family arrived at the CastleFarm, with the intention of deciding what was to be done. An arrangementhad been partially made with a young farmer of the district, who wasready to enter upon the remainder of the lease, and whom the factor onthe part of the Duke was ready to accept as replacing Mrs. Murray in theresponsibilities of the tenancy. This, of course, everybody felt was thenatural step to be taken, and it left the final question as to how theold lady herself was to be disposed of, clear and unembarrassed. EvenEdgar himself was not sufficiently Quixotic to suppose that Mrs.Murray's feelings and pride should be so far consulted as to keep up thefarm for her amusement, while she was no longer able to manage itsmanifold concerns.Mr. and Mrs. Campbell arrived first in their gig, which was seated forfour persons, and which, indeed, Mr. Campbell called a phaeton. Theirhorse was a good steady, sober-minded brown horse, quite free from anyimaginativeness or eccentricity, plump and sleek, and well-groomed; andthe whole turnout had an appearance of comfort and well-being. Theybrought with them a young man whom Edgar had not yet seen, a Dr. CharlesMurray, from the East-country, the son of Mrs. Murray's eldest son, whohad arrived that morning by the steamboat at Loch Arroch Head. FromGreenock by the same conveyance--but not in Mr. Campbell's gig--cameJames Murray, another of the old lady's sons, who was "a provisionmerchant" in that town, dealing largely in hams and cheeses, and full ofthat reverential respect for money which is common with his kind. Lastlythere arrived from Kildarton on the other side of Loch Long, a lady whohad taken the opportunity, as she explained to Edgar, of indulging heryoung people with a picnic, which they were to hold in a little woodeddell, round the corner of the stubble field, facing Loch Long, while shecame on to join the family party, and decide upon her mother's destiny.This was Mrs. MacKell, Mrs. Murray's youngest daughter, a good-looking,high-complexioned woman of forty-five, the wife of a Glasgow "merchant"(the phrase is wide, and allows of many gradations), who had been livingin sea-side quarters, or, as her husband insisted on expressing it, "atthe saut water," in the pleasant sea-bathing village of Kildarton,opposite the mouth of Loch Arroch. The boat which deposited her at thelittle landing-place belonging to the Castle Farm, was a heavy boat ofthe district, filled with a bright-coloured and animated party, andprovided with the baskets and hampers necessary for their party ofpleasure. Mrs. MacKell stood on the bank, waving her hand to them asthey hoisted the sail and floated back again round the yellow edge ofthe stubble field."Mind you keep your warm haps on, girls, and don't wet your feet," shecalled to them; "and oh, Andrew, my man, for mercy's sake take care ofthat awful sail!"This adjuration was replied to by a burst of laughter in many voices,and a "Never fear, mother," from Andrew; but Mrs. MacKell shook hergood-looking head as she accepted Edgar's hand to ascend the slope. Allthe kindred regarded Edgar with a mixture of curiosity and awe, and itwas, perhaps, a slight nervous shyness in respect to this stranger, soaristocratical-looking, as Mrs. MacKell expressed herself, which gave alittle additional loudness and apparent gaiety to that excellent woman'sfirst address."I'm always afraid of those sails. They're very uncanny sort of thingswhen a person does not quite understand the nature of our lochs. Isuppose, Mr. Edgar, you're in that case?" said Mrs. MacKell, looking athim with an ingratiating smile.He was her nephew, there could be no doubt of it, and she had a right totalk to him familiarly; but at the same time he was a fine gentleman anda stranger, and made an impression upon her mind which was butinadequately counter-balanced by any self-assurances that he was "justan orphan lad--no better--not to say a great deal worse off than our ownbairns." Such representations did not affect the question as they oughtto have done, when this strange personage, "no better, not to say agreat deal worse" than themselves, stood with his smile which made themslightly uncomfortable, before them. It was the most open and genialsmile, and in former times Edgar had been supposed a great deal too muchdisposed to place himself on a level with all sorts of people; butnow-a-days his look embarrassed his humble relations. There was acertain amusement in it, which bore no reference to them, which wasentirely at himself, and the quaintly novel position in which he foundhimself, but which nevertheless affected them, nobody could have toldwhy. He was not laughing at them, respectablest of people. They couldnot take offence, neither could they divine what he was laughing at; butthe curious, whimsical, and often rueful amusement which mingled withmany much less agreeable feelings, somehow made itself felt and producedan effect upon which he had never calculated. It was something they didnot understand, and this consciousness partially irritated, partiallyawed these good people, who felt that the new man in their midst was abeing beyond their comprehension. They respected his history and hisprevious position, though with a little of that characteristic contemptwhich mingles so strangely in Scotland with many old prejudices infavour of rank and family; they respected more honestly and entirely hislittle property, the scraps of his former high estate which made himstill independent; but above all they now respected, though with someirritation, what seemed to them the unfathomableness of his character,the lurking smile in his eyes. It confirmed the superiority whichimagination already acknowledged."I have not had much experience of the lochs," said Edgar, followingwith his eyes the clumsy but gay boat, with its cargo of laughter, andfrankly gay, if somewhat loud, merry-making.Mrs. MacKell saw his look and was gratified."You'll not know which are your cousins among so many," she said; "and,indeed, the girls have been plaguing me to write over and ask you tocome. They were all away back in Glasgow when my mother took ill, andjust came down last week on my account. It's late for sea-bathingquarters in Scotland; and, indeed, when they took it into their headsabout this pic-nic, I just raged at them. A pic-nic in October, and onthe loch! But when children set their hearts on a thing the mother's ayemade to give way; and they had to be kept quiet, you see, while mymother was ill, not knowing how it might end.""That is true," said Edgar; "otherwise, so far as my poor grandmother isconcerned, this cannot be called a very joyful occasion.""I don't see that for my part," cried Mrs. MacKell, feeling herselfattacked, and responding with instant readiness. "Dear me! if I were inmy mother's position, to see all my children about me, all that remain,would aye be a joyful occasion, whatever was the cause; and what bettercould she do at her age than go up the loch to my sister Jean'scomfortable house, where she would be much made of, and have all her oldfriends about her? My mother has been a good mother. I have not a wordto say against that; but she's always been a proud woman, awfully proud,holding her head as high as the Duchess, and making everybody standabout. I'll not say but what it has been very good for us, for we'venever fallen among the common sort. But still, you know, unless wherethere's siller that sort of thing cannot be kept up. Of course, I wouldlike it better," added Mrs. MacKell, "to have my mother near, where Icould send the bairns--excuse me for using the words of the place.""Oh, I like the words," said Edgar, with a laugh, which he could notquite restrain--better than the sentiments, he would have said."Where I could send any of my young folk that happened to be lookingwhite, at any moment," she went on; "far different from what I could dowith Jean, who has the assurance to tell me she always invites herfriends when she wants them, though her son has his dinner with us everySunday of his life during the Session! Therefore it's clear what myinterest is. But you see, Mr. Edgar," she continued, softening, "youhave the ways of a rich man. You never think of the difficulties. Oh!Charles, is that you? I'm glad to see you looking so well; and how arethings going in the East country? and how is your sister Marg'ret, andlittle Bell? If my young folk had known you were here, they would havewanted you away with them in the boat. But I must go ben and see mymother before all the folk come in. I suppose you are going to lookover the farm, and the beasts, with the rest."The young doctor--upon whom as a man of his own age, and one more likethe people he had been accustomed to than those he now found around him,Edgar had looked, with more interest than any of his other relations hadcalled from him--came up to him now with a face overcast with care."May I speak to you about this painful subject," he said, "before theothers come in?""Why a painful subject?" asked Edgar, with a smile, which was halftremulous with feeling, and half indignant, too proud for sympathy."It may not be so to you," said the young man. "She brought us up, everyone of my family; but what can I do? I have a brother in Australia, toofar off to help, and another a clerk in London. As for me, I have thecharge of my eldest sister, who is a widow with a child. You don't knowwhat a hard fight it is for a young medical man struggling to make hisway.""No, not yet," said Edgar, with a smile."Not yet? How can you know? If I were to take my grandmother home withme, which I would do gladly, she would be far from everything that sheknows and cares for--in a new place, among strangers. Her whole lifewould be broken up. And I could not take Jeanie," the young man added,with a thrill of still greater pain in his voice. "There would be otherdangers. What can we do? I cannot bear to think that she must leave thisplace. But I have so little power to help, and consequently so littlevoice in the matter.""I have not very much," said Edgar; "but yet enough, I think, to decidethis question. And so long as I have a shilling, she shall not be drivenaway from her home. On that I have made up my mind."His new cousin looked at him with admiration--then with a sigh:"What a thing money is," he said; "ever so little of it. You can take ahigh hand with them, having something; but I, to whom Robert Campbelland Mr. MacKell have both lent money to set me going--"Edgar held out his hand to his companion."When this is settled I shall be in the same position," he said; "worse,for you have a profession, and I have none. You must teach me how I canbest work for daily bread.""You are joking," said the young doctor, with a smile.Like the others, he could not believe that Edgar, once so rich, couldever be entirely poor; and that he should denude himself altogether ofhis living for the sake of the old mother, whom they were all quiteready to help--in reason, was an idea impossible to be comprehended, andwhich nobody believed for a moment. He said nothing in reply, and thetwo stood together before the door waiting for the other men of theparty, who were looking over "the beasts" and farm implements, andcalculating how much they would bring.James Murray, the provision merchant, was the typical Scotchman offiction and drama--a dry, yellow man, with keen grey eyes, surrounded bymany puckers, scrubby sandy hair, and a constant regard for his owninterest. The result had been but indifferent, for he was the poorest ofthe family, always in difficulties, and making the sparest of livings bymeans of tremendous combinations of skill and thought sufficient to havemade the most fabulous fortune--only fortune had never come his way. Hehad been poking the cows in the ribs, and inspecting the joints of everyplough and harrow as if his life depended upon them. As he came forwardto join the others, he put down in the note-book which he held in hishand, the different sums which he supposed they would bring. Altogether,it was a piece of business which pleased him. If he had ever had anysentimental feeling towards his old home, that was over many a long yearago; and that his mother, when she could no longer manage the farm,should give it up, and be happy and thankful to find a corner at herdaughter's fireside, was to him the most natural thing in life. The onlything that disturbed him, was the impossibility of making her seek acomposition with her creditors, and thus saving something "for anemergency.""James has aye an eye to what may come after," Mr. Campbell said, withhis peculiar humour, and a laugh which made Edgar long to pitch him intothe loch; "he's thinking of the succession. Not that I'm opposed tocompounding with the creditors in such a case. She's well-known for anhonest woman that's paid her way, and held up her head with the best,and we all respect her, and many of us would have no objection to make abit small sacrifice. I'm one myself, and I can speak. But your mother isa woman that has always had a great deal of her own way.""More than was good for her," said James Murray, shaking his head."She's as obstinate as an auld mule when she takes a notion. She's beenmistress and mair these forty year, and like a women, she'll hear noreason. Twelve or fifteen shillings in the pound is a very finecomposition, and touches no man's credit, besides leaving an old wifesomething in her pocket to win respect.""And to leave behind her," said Campbell, laughing and slapping hisbrother-in-law on the back.This was at the door of the farm-house, where they lingered a momentbefore going in. The loud laugh of the one and testy exclamation of theother, sounded in through the open windows of the parlour, where themistress of the house sat with her daughters; probably the entireconversation had reached them in the same way. But of that no one tookany thought. This meeting and family consultation was rather "a ploy"than otherwise to all the party. They liked the outing, the inspection,the sense of superiority involved. The sons and the daughters wereintent upon making their mother hear reason and putting all nonsense outof her head. She had been foolish in these last years of her life. Shehad brought up Tom's bairns, for instance, in a ridiculous way. It wasall very well for Robert Campbell's son, who was able to afford it, tobe sent to College, but what right had Charlie Murray to be made agentleman of at the expense of all the rest? To be sure his uncles andaunts were somewhat proud of him now that the process was completed, andliked to speak of "my nephew the doctor;" but still it was a thing thata grandmother, all whose descendants had an equal right to her favours,had no title to do."My bairns are just as near in blood, and have just as good a right to ashare of what's going; and when you think how many there are of them,and the fight we have had to give them all they require," Mrs. MacKellsaid to Mrs. Campbell."Many or few," said Mrs. Campbell to Mrs. MacKell, "we have all a rightto our share. I've yet to learn that being one of ten bairns gives moreclaim than being an only child. Johnnie ought to be as much to hisgrandmother as any grand-bairn she has--as much as Charlie Murray thathas cost her hundreds. But she never spent a pound note on my Johnnieall his life.""There have been plenty pound-notes spent on him," said the youngersister, "but we need not quarrel, for neither yours nor mine will getanything from their grandmother now. But I hope the men will stand fast,and not yield to any fancies. My mother's always been a good mother tous, but very injudicious with these children. There's Jeanie, now,never taught to do a hand's turn, but encouraged in all her fancies.""I would like to buy in the china," said Mrs. Campbell. "Auld china isvery much thought of now-a-days. I hear the Duchess drinks her tea outof nothing else, and the dafter-like the better. You'll be surprisedwhen you see how many odds and ends there are about the house, thatwould make a very good show if they were rightly set out.""My mother has some good things too, if all the corners were cleared,that are of no use to her, but that would come in very well for thegirls," said Mrs. MacKell; and with these kind and reverential thoughtsthey met their mother, who perhaps also--who knows?--had in her day beencovetous of things that would come in for the girls. This was the easyand cheerful view which the family took of the circumstances altogether.Not one of them intended to be unkind. They were all quite determinedthat she should "want for nothing;" but still it was, on the whole,rather "a ploy" and pleasant expedition, this family assembly, which hadbeen convened for the purpose of dethroning its head.CHAPTER V.The Family Martyr.I need not say that the feelings with which the old woman awaited thedecision of her fate were of a very different character. She had lainawake almost the whole night, thinking over the long life which she hadspent within those walls. She had been married at eighteen, and now shewas seventy. I wonder whether she felt in herself one tithe of thedifference which these words imply. I do not believe she did; except atspecial moments we never feel ourselves old; we are, to ourselves, whatwe always were, the same creature, inexhaustible, unchangeable,notwithstanding all vulgar exterior transformation. Poor old Mrs. Murrayat seventy, poor, aged, ruined, upon whom her children were to sit thatday and give forth her sentence of banishment, her verdict ofdestitution, never more to call anything her own, to lodge in the houseof another, to eat a stranger's bread--was to her own knowledge the samegirl, eighteen years old, who had opened bright eyes in that chamber inthose early summer mornings fifty years ago when life was so young.Fifty years passed before her as she lay with her eyes turned to thewall. How many joys in them, how many sorrows! how tired she had laindown, how lightly risen up, how many plans she had pondered there, howmany prayers she had murmured unheard of by any but God, prayers, manyof them never answered, many forgotten even by herself, some, which sheremembered best, granted almost as soon as said. How she had cried andwept in an agony, for example, for the life of her youngest child, andhow it had been better almost from that hour! The child was herdaughter, Mrs. MacKell, now a virtuous mother of a family; but after allto her own mother, perhaps it would not now have mattered very much hadthat prayer dropped unheard. How many recollections there are to lookback on in seventy years, and how bewildering the effort to rememberwhether the dreamer lying there is eighteen, or forty, or seventy! andshe to be judged and sentenced and know her doom to-day.She did not shed any tear or make any complaint, but acknowledged toherself with the wonderful stoicism of the poor that it was natural,that nothing else was to be looked for. Jean and her husband would bekind--enough; they would give the worn-out mother food and shelter; theywould not neglect nor treat her cruelly. All complaint was silent in herheart; but yet the events of this day were no "ploy" to her. She got upat her usual time, late now in comparison to the busy and active past,and came down with Jeanie's help to the parlour, and seated herself inthe arm-chair where she had sat for so many years. There she passed themorning very silent, spending the time with her own thoughts. She hadtold Jeanie what to do, to prepare for the early dinner, which they wereall to eat together."You would be a good bairn," she had said with a smile, "if you wouldtake it upon you to do all this, Jeanie, and say nothing to me."Jeanie had sense enough to take her at her word, and thus all themorning she had been alone, sitting with eyes fixed on Benvohrlan, oftenwith a strange smile on her face, pondering and thinking. She had herstocking in her hands, and knitted on and on, weaving in her musing soulwith the thread. When her daughters came in she received them verykindly with a wistful smile, looking up into their faces, wondering ifthe sight of the mother who bore them had any effect upon these women.Still more wistfully she looked at the men who followed. Many a volumehas been written about the love of parents, the love of mothers, itsenthusiasms of hope and fancy, its adorations of the unworthy, its agonyfor the lost; but I do not remember that anyone has ventured to touchupon a still more terrible view of the subject, the disappointment, forexample, with which such a woman as I have attempted to set before thereader--a woman full of high aspirations, noble generosities, andperhaps an unwarrantable personal pride, all intensified by the homelycircumstances of life around her--sometimes looks upon the absolutelycommonplace people whom she has brought into the world. She, too, hashad her dreams about them while they were children and all things seemedpossible--while they were youths with still some grace and freshness ofthe morning veiling their unheroic outlines. But a woman of seventy cancherish no fond delusions about her middle-aged sons and daughters whoare to all intents and purposes as old as she is. What a dismal sense offailure must come into such a woman's heart while she looks at them!Perhaps this is one reason why grandfathers and grandmothers throwthemselves so eagerly into the new generation, by means of which humannature can always go on deceiving itself. Heavens! what a differencebetween the ordinary man or woman at fifty, and that ideal creaturewhich he, or she, appeared to the mother's eyes at fifteen! The oldpeople gaze and gaze to see our old features in us; and who can expressthe blank of that disappointment, the cruel mortification of those oldhopes, which never find expression in any words?Mrs. Murray, from the household place where she had ruled so long, whereshe had brought up upon her very life-blood like the pelican, those samecommonplace people--where she had succoured the poor, and entertainedstrangers, and fed from her heart two generations--looked wistfully,half wonderingly at them as they all entered, and sat down round her, todecide what was to be done with her. Something of a divine despair, likethat God Himself might have felt when the creation he had pronouncedgood, turned to evil--but with a more poignant thrill of human anguishin the fact of her own utter powerlessness to move to good or to evilthose independent souls which once had seemed all hers, to influence asshe would--swept through her like a sudden storm. But to show anyoutward sign of this was impossible. Theirs now was the upper hand; theywere in the height of life, and she was old. "When thou wast young, thougirdedst thyself, and walkedst whither thou wouldest; but when thoushalt be old, thou shalt stretch forth thy hands, and another shall girdthee, and carry thee whither thou wouldest not;" she said these words toherself with a piteous patience and submission; but unheard by anysoul,--unless, indeed, it was by those sympathisers in Heaven, who hearso much, yet make no sign that we can hear or see.They came in quite cheerfully all of them, full of the many anddiversified affairs which, for the moment, they were to make thesacrifice of laying aside to settle the fate of their mother, and heldover her body, as it were, a pleasant little family palaver."The children have gone down the loch for a pic-nic; they would havecome in to see Granny, but I said you would have no time for themto-day. The weather is just wonderful for this time of the year, or Inever would have allowed such a thing.""It's all very well for you town-folk to praise up a good day," said Mr.Campbell, "which is no doubt pleasant when it comes to them that have nointerest in the land--but a kind of an insult to us after all the softweather that has ruined the corn. What's the use of one good day exceptfor your pic-nics and nonsense? nothing but to make the handful ofwheat sprout the faster. And the glass is down again--We'll have morerain the morn.""You'll find it very dry in the East country, Chairles," said Mrs.Campbell; "more pleasant for walking, but very stour and troublesome tokeep a house clean, and a great want of water. Your sister Marg'ret wasaye ill to please about the weather; but after a' that's come and gone,I hope she's no so fanciful now?""You'll be setting up a gig soon?" said James Murray, "or, perhaps,you've done it already? It's expensive, but it's a kind of necessity fora doctor.""Indeed I cannot see that; a strong young man like Charles that's wellable to walk! but some folk are always taking care of themselves," saidMrs. MacKell. "In Glasgow, the richest men in the place think nothing ofa walk, wet or dry--and my bairns, I assure you, are never spoiled withsuch luxuries.""A gig to a doctor is like a spade to a labouring man," said RobertCampbell, sententiously; "that's an expense that I approve. Keep you upappearances, Charles--that's as long as you can do it out of your ownpocket," he said with a laugh, thrusting his hand deep into his own."I know where you could lay your hand on a very decent machine, cheaper,I answer for't, than anything you'll get in the East country," saidJames."And I am sure you have plenty of old harness that could be cleaned up,Robert," said Mrs. Campbell, "if it's thought necessary. To be sure, ifhe was sent for in a hurry to some country place, perhaps, or the otherside of the town--""Thank you all," said the young doctor, "but I have a--conveyance. Icould not do without it. I took it from my predecessor, along with thehouse and the goodwill.""Did you hear what he said?" said Mrs. MacKell, aside, to Mrs. Campbell,"a conveyance, not a gig, as we were all saying. Depend upon it, it'ssome grand landau, or something, where Marg'ret can lie and take herease. To think how my mother spoiled these bairns!"Mrs. Murray took no part in all their talk. She sat with her old eyessadly turned upon them, eyes that were clear with the pallid liquidlight of a sky just cleared from rain. I think the only one who was atall interested in the old woman, beyond the matter-of-fact interestwhich belonged to her as the cause of the meeting, was Edgar, who hadseated himself close to her, and who now laid his hand, in a silentsympathy which nobody else felt, upon the hand with which she held thearm of her chair. Her hand was grey-white, the colour of old age, withall the veins visible on the wrinkled surface. When he put his youngwarm hand upon it, it felt almost as cold as death."Don't you think," he said, with some abruptness, "that my grandmother'sconcerns ought to be settled before we talk of anything else?"They had all, as I have said, a respect for Edgar, and his voice had animmediate effect."That's true," said Mr. Campbell, "it would be better to settleeverything before dinner;" and with this comfortable levity they allgathered more closely round the table. The drawing in of chairs and thelittle noise of coughing and clearing throats which heralded thecommencement of a new subject, occupied the first minute; then JamesMurray edged slightly away from the table the chair which he had drawnclose to it, and prepared to speak. But before he had opened his lips anunforeseen interruption arose; Mrs. Murray herself took the initiative,a thing entirely unexpected by her children, who had felt, with a senseof security, that they had her fairly in hand."Bairns," she said slowly, and at first in a low tone, while they allturned upon her with surprise, "bairns, I am leaving you to settleeverything. I am old; I would fain have gone to them that's passedbefore me, but the Lord hasna been of my mind. Things have gone badlywith the farm, partly by His providence, partly by my fault--you knowthat as well as I do. In my time, I've commanded you and done what Ithought best. Now the power has gone out of my hands; settle as ye will,and I'll no complain, so long as every man has his ain, and no debt isleft, nor any person to rise up against me and call me an unjust dealer.I've done my best for you while it was in my power. Now, do your best,I'll no complain. Beggars should not be choosers. It's all in yourhands.""Mother, you shouldna speak like that! as if you doubted that we couldthink of anything but your good," cried both her daughters in a breath;"and as for beggars--not one of us would use such a word.""It's what I am," said the old woman firmly. "And there's but one word Ihave to say. You ken all of you what I would like best; that's all I'llsay; every one of you kens what I would like best. But, failing that,I'll do whatever's settled on. I'll no complain.""What you would like, we all know very well," said James Murray,hastily; "but it's impossible, mother, impossible. You canna afford thefarm, you canna afford to keep up a house, doing nothing for it, or tokeep up a family. There's you, and we'll do our best."She made a little gesture with her hands, and relapsed into thestillness which she had not broken when they talked of other affairs.The discrowned monarch sat still to let whoever would take her sceptrefrom her. She took up the stocking she had laid in her lap, and beganknitting again, looking at them with eyes out of which the wistfulnesshad faded. An almost stern submission had replaced the wondering anxiouslook with which she had looked round to see if anyone would understandher, if any would deal with her as she had dealt by them."For you see," continued James Murray, doggedly, "mother, we are none ofus rich, to be guided by your fancies. If we were great ones of thisearth, and you the auld Duchess, say, for example's sake, you might haveyour will, whatever it cost. But we're all poor folk--or comparativelypoor folk. We may give you a welcome to our houses, such as they are,and a share of what we have; but as for siller we have not got it, andwe cannot give you what we have not got to give.""That's just about the real state of the case," said Robert Campbell."There are many things more rife among us than siller. We've all senseenough to see what's for our advantage, and we're all industrious folk,doing our best; but siller is not rife. As for us, Jean and me have longmade up our minds what to do. It's our duty, or at least it's her duty,as the eldest of the daughters; and your mother was always a kindguid-mother to me, and never interfered or made mischief; so I wouldnever oppose Jean's righteous desire. We'll take the old leddy in. Sheshall have a room to herself, and nothing to do, one way or other, morethan she pleases. If she likes to do any small turn in the house, in theway of helping, well and good; but nothing will be asked from her. Andanything that the rest of you think that you could spare--I'm not a manto haggle about my good-mother's board. She shall have her share of allthat's going the same as one of ourselves; but if any of you haveanything to spare----""Would it not be more satisfactory to us all, and more agreeable to mygrandmother," said Edgar, suddenly, "if, without charging Mr. Campbellabove the rest, we were to make up a little income for her, to enableher to keep her own house?"This suggestion fell like a sudden cannon-ball into the group. There wasa universal movement."Well, well, I'm no forcing myself on anybody. Try what you can do,"cried Campbell, offended, pushing his chair from the table."It's just all stuff and nonsense!" cried his wife, reddening withanger.The other two elder people regarded Edgar with a mixture of disapprovaland dismay. And the young doctor, the only one of the party who showedsome sympathy for him, grew very red, and hesitated and cleared histhroat as if to speak--but said nothing. After a moment's pause, JamesMurray turned upon the inconsiderate speaker with a certain solemnity."Who are you, young man," he said, "that you should put in your word anddo what you can to unsettle a well-considered family arrangement? Youheard me say not ten minutes since that just the thing we were wantingin was money. We're no in a position to make up incomes either for auldwives or young lads. We're all ready to acknowledge our duty to mymother, and to pay it in kind according to our ability. If she tires ofJean, she may come to me; none of us would shut our houses against her;but as for an income, and to leave her free to make her house a refugefor the destitute, as she has aye done, more's the pity--""Mother," cried Mrs. MacKell, suddenly, "what for are you looking so atme? Do you think I wouldna rather, far rather, see you in your ownhouse? But I'm no an independent woman as you've been a' your days. I'ma man's wife that has plenty to do with his siller. I brought him not asixpence, as ye well know, but a large expensive family, that wants agreat deal mair than ever we got, as I often tell them. And what can Ido? I went to my man without a penny, and how can I ask him to spend hissiller on my folk? Mother," and here Mrs. MacKell burst into hastysudden crying, half-vexation, half-shame, "it's awfu' unkind, when youken how I am situate, to give such looks at me!""I gave you no looks, Agnes," said the old woman. "Oh, Sirs, hold allyour tongues. I'm the mother that bore you, and never counted the costfor aught that was in my power to get for you. But I will have no strifeof tongues over me. Ye shall not quarrel what you're to give, or howlittle you're to give. I canna bear it. Edgar, my bonnie man, you meanwell, but every word is another stab. Robert Campbell, I take your offerkindly. I'll no be much trouble. I canna promise that I'll no last long,for that's in the Lord's hand, and waes me, I canna cut it short, noby an hour. But it's little I want, and I'll give little trouble--"She paused, with a piteous smile upon her face, gulping down somethingwhich rose in her throat. With this smile she made her abdication,looking round upon them with an anguish of submission and endurance socuriously compounded of a hundred different ingredients of pain, eachgiving sharpness and poignancy to the others, that to describe them allexceeds my power."We'll go ben and get our dinner," she added hurriedly; "we'll say nomore about it. I take it a' for granted, and the rest you can settleamong yourselves.""But I cannot take it for granted," said Edgar. "Stop a little. I willnot give any stabs, my old mother. Look here, my aunts and uncles." Hesaid this with a momentary hesitation, with the half-smile which theyresented; but still they listened, having a respect for him and hisindependence. "I am not like you," said Edgar, still with thathalf-smile. "The only thing I have is money, a little, not worthspeaking of, but still it is mine to do what I like with it. Is it nottrue that there is some talk of building a new farmhouse for the newfarmer, as this one is old and in want of repair? I think I heard yousay so the other day.""It's true enough--what's about it?" said Campbell, shortly."Then my grandmother shall stay here," said Edgar, decisively; "sheshall not be turned out of her home, either by her creditors, or--by hersons and daughters. I have nobody to stop me, neither wife, nor sister,nor child, nor duty. Thank heaven, I have enough left for that! If youwill take the trouble to settle all about it, Mr. Campbell, I shall begrateful; it is all we will ask you for, not your hospitality, only alittle trouble. I don't suppose the Duke will make any difficulties, northe young farmer whom I saw yesterday. Thank you for your kindintentions. My grandmother will not be able to set up a refuge for thedestitute, but no doubt she will serve you all when you require herservices, as she has been used to do all her life," said Edgar, withsome excitement. "Mother, not a word; it is all done, past my power ofchanging as well as yours."They all sat and looked at him with momentary stupefaction, staring,turning to give questioning looks at each other. Was the young man mad?When Edgar ended by pushing some papers across the table to Campbell,they all drew close to look, James Murray taking out eagerly, andputting on with hands that trembled, a large pair of clumsy spectacles.All the four heads of the elder people clustered about these documents;they read the papers each over the other's shoulder."It's all in order--all in order. Young idiot! he's bound himself aslong as she lives," Campbell muttered in an undertone. "Why the deevildidn't ye let us know your intentions and save us a' this trouble?" heexclaimed aloud, putting away the women from behind him with a gesture,and turning with well-put-on indignation to the young man, whoseexcitement had not yet calmed down."Saftly, saftly," said James Murray, "we must not let ourselves becarried away by our feelings. I approve the lad; it's just what I wouldhave done myself had I been without the burden of a family, and plentyof siller to come and go upon. I'll shake hands with you, Edgar, my lad;it's well done and well thought! Robert, here, may have a little feelingon the subject, as being the one that offered his house; but for mypart, I've no hesitation in saying it's well done, Edgar--welldone--just what, in your circumstances, I would have done myself!""By George! you're a clever fellow, Jamie Murray!" cried Campbell, witha loud laugh.The two women did not say anything; they looked at each other, and Mrs.MacKell, who was the most soft-hearted, began to cry."It's what we would all have liked to have done," she said feebly, afteran interval.Her sister turned round sharply and scolded Jeanie, who had been sittingbehind backs looking on, and who now looked up at Edgar with a face soradiant that it struck her aunt with sharp offence--more sharp than thereal offence of the stranger's superior generosity, of which it was areflection."What are you doing there," she said, "you little idle cutty? Did notGranny tell you to see after the dinner? It may be good for her, butit's ruination to you, if you had the sense to see it. Dinna let me seeyou sit there, smil--smiling at a young lad! I wonder you dinna thinkshame! It's all my mother's fault," she added bitterly, placing herselfin the chair by the window, which Jeanie, in dismay and tears, hastilyevacuated; "we were kept to our work and kept in order, in our day;but she's spoiled every creature that's come near her since. I'm gladI've nae girls mysel that she can ruin as she's ruined Jeanie!""Poor thing, she has nae mother to keep her right," said the softersister.I think, for my part, that the sharp offence and bitterness of thewomen at the sudden turn that things had taken, showed a higher moralsense than the eager satisfaction with which, after the first moment,the men received it. Murray and Campbell both felt the immediate relief,as far as they themselves were concerned. The women felt first the shameand stigma of not having attempted to do for their mother what thisstranger was so ready to do. The result was much less pleasant and lessamiable to witness, but it showed, I think, a higher feeling of rightand wrong.CHAPTER VI.A Party in a Parlour.The dinner which followed was not, the first part of it at least, a verycomfortable meal. Mrs. Murray herself was profoundly shaken by theconference altogether. She was unable to say anything to her grandsonexcept the almost wild "No, lad; no, Edgar, my bonnie man!" with whichshe had endeavoured to stop him at first. After this she had not uttereda word. She had taken his hand between her old and worn hands, andraised her face as if to God--praying for blessings on him? No--I do notthink her mind was capable of such an effort--she was looking up to theDivine Friend who had been her refuge in everything these seventy years,in a strange rapture of surprise and joy. How much part the suddenchange in her circumstances had to do with the joy, I cannot tell--verylittle I think, infinitesimally little. "I have one son, one true son,after all; heart of my heart, and soul of my soul!" This was thepredominating thought in her mind, the half-ecstatic feeling whichflooded her old being like sudden sunshine. Amid all the griefs anddisappointments to which such a soul is liable, there remains to one nowand then the tender and generous delight of seeing others do by her asshe would have done by them. How sweet it is; before all delight ingifts, or even in affection! We think of the golden rule more often inthe way of a command, employing it to touch our own souls to languidduty; but there are occasions when it is given back to us, so to speak,in the way of recompense, vivified and quickened into rapture. This oldwoman had practised it as she could all her life, and others had notdone to her as she had done to them; but here, at the end of herexistence, came one--her reward, one heir of her nature, one issue ofher soul. Thus she had her glimpse of heaven in the very momentof her lowest humiliation. She had done little personally forhim--little--nothing--except to harm him; but she had done much forothers, sacrificing herself that they might live, and the stranger, inwhose training she had had no hand, who had with her no link of unionbut the mystic tie of blood, gave back to her full measure, heaped up,and running over. I must leave to the imagination of the reader the keensatisfaction and joy, sharp and poignant almost as pain, with which thisaged soul, worn out and weary, received full in her heart, all at once,as by a shot or thunderbolt, the unthought of, unhoped-for recompense.The men, as I have said, were the first to reconcile themselves to thesudden revolution. If any thrill of shame came over them, it wasinstantly quenched, and ceased to influence the hardened mail, beaten bymuch vicissitude of weather, which covered them. The women werethinner-skinned, so to speak, more easily touched in their pride, andwere sensible of the irony with which, half-consciously to himself,Edgar had spoken. But, perhaps, the person most painfully affected ofall was the young doctor, who had listened to Edgar with a painful flushon his face, and with a pang of jealous pain and shame, not easy tobear. He went up to the old lady as soon as the discussion was over, andsat down close by her, and held a long conversation in an undertone."Grandmother," he said, the flush returning and covering his face withpainful heat, "you do not think me ungrateful or slow to interfere? Youknow it is not want of will, but want of means. You know--""Charlie, was I asking anything, that you speak so to me? I know youcould not interfere. You are in their debt still, poor lad?""Yes, I am in their debt still. I don't know how to get out of it; itgrinds me to the ground!" cried the young man. "But what can I do?"Mrs. Murray patted his hand softly with her old worn fingers; but shewas silent, with that silence which the weak nature, eager forapprobation, but unable to make a bold effort after good, feels soprofoundly."You don't say anything," said Dr. Charles, with a mixture of petulance."You think I might have done more?""No, Charlie, no," said the old woman; "as you say not. I would be gladto see you free of this bondage; but you must know best yourself.""There is so much to do," said the young doctor. "I must get a position.I must make an appearance like others in my profession. So many thingsare necessary that you never think of here in a country place; and youknow Margaret has no health to speak of. There is so much expense inevery way.""She was always handless," said Mrs. Murray. "She should come to me withlittle Bell, and let you take your chance. Living costs but little here,and what is enough for one is enough for two," said the old woman, withher perennial and instinctive liberality of heart."Enough for one! Jeanie is going to leave you then, as the Campbellstold me," said the young man hastily. "He is to marry her as they said?""I ken nothing about marrying or giving in marriage," said thegrandmother, with some severity of tone. "If that is still in your mind,Charlie--""It is not in my mind--it was never in my mind," he said with aneagerness which was almost passionate. "She has a lovely face, but shenever was or could be a fit wife for a man in my position. There neverwas anything in that.""Charlie, my man, you think too much of your position," said the oldwoman, shaking her head; "and if there was nothing in it, why should yougloom and bend your brows at the thought that Edgar might care for thebonnie face as well as you? He does not, more's the pity.""And why should you say more's the pity? Do you want to be rid ofJeanie? Do you want to be left alone?""I'm but a bruised reed for anyone to trust to," she said. "Soon, soonI'll have passed away, and the place that now knows me will know me nomore. I would be glad to see my poor bairn in somebody's hand that wouldlast longer than me."A momentary flush of strong feeling passed over the young man's face."Grandmother," he said, "you were too good to me. If I had been bred afarmer like yourself--""You would have made but a weirdless farmer, Charlie, my man. It's notthe trade that does it," said Mrs. Murray, with some sadness. "ButMarg'ret had better come to me. She may hinder you, but she'll no helpyou. The bairns are maybe right; I was injudicious, Charlie, and grievedfor you that were all delicate things without a mother. I should haveknown better. You are little able to fend for yourselves in this world,either Marg'ret or you.""I don't know why you should say so, grandmother. I am making my way inmy profession," said Dr. Charles, not without offence, "and Margaret isvery greatly thought of, and asked to the best houses. If you havenothing more to blame yourself with than you have in our case--"Mrs. Murray sighed, but she made no answer. It was not for nothing thather daughters had reproached her. Charles Murray and his sister Margarethad been the two youngest of the flock, her eldest son Tom's children,whom the brave old woman had taken into her house, and brought up withthe labour of her own hands. The others were scattered about the world,fighting their way in all regions; but Charlie and Margaret had been asapples of her eye. She had done everything for them, bringing up the sonto a learned profession, and "making a lady of" the gentle and prettygirl, who was of a stock less robust than the other Murrays. And as Mrs.Murray had no patent of exemption from the failures that followsometimes the best efforts, she had not succeeded in this case. CharlesMurray, without being absolutely unsuccessful, had fulfilled none of thehigh hopes entertained concerning him; and Margaret had made a foolishmarriage, and had been left in a few years a penniless widow dependentupon her brother. No one knew exactly what the two were doing now. Theywere "genteel" and "weirdless," living, it was feared, above theirmeans, and making no attempt to pay back the money which had been lentby their wealthier friends to set the young doctor afloat.This was why the children she had trained so carefully could give theirold mother no help. Margaret had cried bitterly when she heard that theold home was about to be broken up, and Charles's heart was torn with apoignant sense of inability to help. But the tears and the pain wouldhave done Mrs. Murray little good, and they were not of any profoundimportance to the brother and sister, both of whom were capable of somenew piece of extravagance next day by way of consoling themselves. Butthough Mrs. Murray was not aware of it, the sharp shock of Edgar'sunlooked-for munificence towards her, and the jealousy and shame withwhich Dr. Charles witnessed it, was the most salutary accident that hadhappened to him all his life. The contrast of his own conduct, he whowas so deeply indebted to her, and that of his unknown cousin, gave sucha violent concussion to all his nerves as the young man had never feltbefore; and whatever might be the after result of this shock, itspresent issue was not agreeable. A sullen shadow came over him at thehomely dinner to which they all sat down with such changed feelings. Hehad been the only one to whom Edgar had turned instinctively forsympathy, and Edgar was the first to feel this change. James Murray andRobert Campbell were the only two who kept up the languid conversation,and their talk, we need not add, was not of a very elevated kind."The mutton's good, mother," said James; "you've aye good mutton at LochArroch; not like the stuff that's vended to us at I canna tell how muchthe pound. That's a great advantage you have in the country. Your ownmutton, or next thing to it; your own fowls and eggs, and all that. Youshould go on keeping poultry; you were a very good henwife in the olddays, when we were all young; and there's nothing that sells better thannew-laid eggs and spring chickens. Though you give up the farm, I wouldadvise you to keep them on still.""And I would not wonder but you might have grass enough for a cow," saidCampbell. "A cow's a great thing in a house. There's aye the milkwhatever happens, and a pickle butter is never lost. It sells at as muchas eighteen pence a pound on the other side of the loch, when thoseGlasgow people are down for the saut water. Asking your pardon, Agnes, Iwas not meaning the like of you; there are plenty Glasgow people thatare very decent folk, but it cannot be denied that they make everythingvery dear.""And what is that but an advantage to everybody as long as we can pay,aye, the double if we like?" cried Mrs. MacKell, forgetting her previousplea of comparative poverty. "We like everything of the best, I don'tdeny it; and who has a better right, seeing our men work hard for everypenny they make?""For that matter so do the colliers and that kind of cattle, thatconsume all they earn in eating and drinking," said Campbell. "I like agood dinner myself; but the way you Glasgow folk give yourselves up toit, beats me. That's little to the purpose, however, in the presentcase. James's advice is very good advice, and so you'll find is mine. Iwould not object to being at the expense of buying in that bonnie browncow, the one you fancied, Jean--women are aye fanciful in thesematters--if there will be anybody about the house that could supper andmilk a cow?"He looked doubtfully at Jeanie as he spoke, and they all looked at her,some suspiciously, some contemptuously. They all seemed to Jeanie toreproach her that she was not a strong, robust "lass" ready to help hergrandmother."I can milk Brounie; she's so gentle," said Jeanie, half under herbreath, looking wistfully at her critics. James Murray uttered asuppressed "humph!""A bonnie young woman for a farm-house!" he said, "that can milk a cowwhen it's gentle. I hope you'll save the lad's siller as much aspossible, mother; no running into your old ways, taking folk into yourbosom, or entertaining strangers on the smallest provocation, as youused to do.""I hope my grandmother will do precisely as she likes--in the way thatpleases her best," said Edgar with emphasis."I am saying," said Campbell with emphasis, "a cow; and the cocks andhens, according to James. An honest penny is aye a good thing, howeverit's got. If young Glen gets the farm, as is likely, he'll be wanting alodging till the new house is built. I would take the lad in and givehim accommodation, if it was me. In short, there's a variety of thingsthat would be little trouble, and would show a desire to make the bestof what's given you; and any assistance that I can be of, or Jean--""Oh my mother's above my help or yours either," said Mrs. Campbell, withsome bitterness. "You need not push yourself in, Rob, when neither younor me are wanted."Mrs. Murray listened to all this with grave patience and forbearance.She smiled faintly at her daughter's petulance, and shook her head."Bairns," she said, gently, "I guided my own concerns before you wereborn." It was the only reproof she attempted to administer, and it wasfollowed by a pause, during which the sound of knives and forks was veryaudible, each individual of the party plying his as for a wager, in thesudden stillness which each affronted person thought it doubly incumbenton him and her to keep up. Mrs. Murray looked round upon them all with asmile, which gradually softened into suppressed but genial humour. "Ihope you are all making a good dinner," she said.The afternoon after this passed as a Sunday afternoon often passes in afamily gathering. They all stood a little on their defence, but, with akeen appreciation of the fact, that the mother, whom they all intendedto advise and lecture, had certainly got the upper hand, and had been onthe verge of laughing at them, if she had not actually done so, wereprudent, and committed themselves no further. They all went out afterdinner to see the site where the new farm-house was to be built, and tospeculate on the way in which young Glen would manage the farm, andwhether he would succeed better than its previous occupant. The women ofthe party visited "the beasts," as the men had done before dinner, andthe men strolled out to the fields, and weighed in their hands the dampears of corn, and shook their heads over the length of the straw, andpointed out to each other how badly the fields were arranged, and howthe crops had been repeated year after year. "It's time it was all inother hands," they said to each other. As for Dr. Charles, he avoidedthe other members of the party--the uncles who might ask for the moneythey had lent him, and the aunts who might inquire with an unduecloseness of criticism into his proceedings and those of his sister. Hesat and talked with his grandmother in the parlour, answering herquestions, and making conversation with her in a way which was somewhatformal. In short, it was very like a Sunday afternoon--and the sense ofbeing in their best clothes, and having nothing to do, and being, as itwere, bound over to keep the peace, was very wearisome to all these goodpeople. The little excitement of pulling to pieces, so to speak, thehouse which had sheltered and reared them, was over, and thus a certainflat of disappointment and everyday monotony mingled with the sense ofsomething unusual which was in their meeting. Their purpose was foiledaltogether, and the business manqu, yet they could not but professpleasure in the unexpected turn that things had taken. It was very likea Sunday afternoon.And it is impossible to tell what a relief it was to all, when the bigfishing-boat came heavily round the corner with the picnic party, andJeanie, in her plain brown frock, ran down to the landing to bid hercousins come into tea. There were some six or seven in the boat,slightly damp and limp, but in high spirits; three of whom were girls,much more gaily dressed than Jeanie, yet with a certain generalresemblance to her. They all rushed fluttering in their gay ribbons upto the farm-house, glad of the novelty, and threw themselves upon"Granny," whom they admired without the criticism in which their motherindulged less than her brothers and sisters. They did not take muchnotice of Jeanie, but Dr. Charles was full of interest for them, and theunknown Edgar, who was still more emphatically "a gentleman," excitedtheir intensest curiosity. "Where is he? which is him?" they whisperedto each other; and when Bell, the youngest, exclaimed withdisappointment, that he was just like Charlie Murray, and nothingparticular after all, her two elder sisters snubbed her at once. "If youcannot see the difference you should hold your tongue," said JeanieMacKell, who called herself Jane, and had been to a school in England,crowning glory of a Scotch girl on her promotion. "Not but what Charlesis very nice-looking, and quite a gentleman," said Margaret, moremeekly, who was the second daughter. The presence of these girls, and ofthe young men in attendance upon them, to wit Andrew, their brother, andtwo friends of his own class, young men for whom natural good looks didnot do so much as for the young women, and who were, perhaps, bettereducated, without being half so presentable--made the tea-table muchmerrier and less embarrassed than the dinner had been. The MacKellsended by being all enthralled by Edgar, whose better manners told uponthem, (as a higher tone always tells upon women,) whose superiority totheir former attendants was clear as daylight, and who was not stiffand afraid to commit himself like Charles Murray; "quite a gentleman,"though they all held the latter to be. As for Edgar himself, he was soheartily thankful for the relief afforded by this in-road of freshguests, that he was willing to think the very best of his cousins, andto give them credit--that is the female part of them--for being the bestof the family he had yet seen. He walked with them to their boat, andput them in, when sunset warned them to cross the loch without delay,and laughingly excused himself from accepting their eager invitations,only on the ground that "business" demanded his departure on the nextday. Mrs. MacKell took him aside before she embarked, and shook his handwith tears gathering in her eyes."I could not say anything before them all," she said, with an emotionwhich was partly real; "but I'll never forget what you've done for mymother--and oh, what a comfort it is to me to think I leave her in herain old house! God bless you for it!""Good-bye," said Edgar, cheerily, and he stood on the banks and watchedthe boat with a smile. True feeling enough, perhaps, and yet how oddlymingled! He laughed to himself as he went back to the house with anuneasy, mingling of pain and shame.CHAPTER VII.Gentility.Charles Murray did not return to the Campbells' house for the night ashe had originally intended. The relatives were all out of sorts witheach other, and inclined to quarrel among themselves in consequence ofthe universal discomfiture which had come upon them, not from eachothers' hands, but from the stranger in their midst. And as it was quitepossible that Campbell, being sore and irritable, might avenge himselfby certain inquiries into Dr. Charles's affairs, the young man thoughtit wiser on the whole to keep out of his way. And the grandmother'shouse was common property. Although only a few hours before they had allmade up their minds that it was to be no longer hers, and that shethenceforward was to be their dependent, the moment that she becameagain certain of being mistress in her own house, that very moment allher family returned to their ancient conviction that they had a right toits shelter and succour under all and every kind of circumstances.James Murray went away arranging in his own mind that he would send hisyoungest daughter "across" before the winter came on, "to get herstrength up." "One bairn makes little difference in the way of meals,and she can bring some tea and sugar in a present," he said to himself;while Dr. Charles evidenced still more instantaneously the familyopinion by saying at once that he should stay where he was tillto-morrow."It seems much more natural to be here than in any other house," he saidcaressingly to his grandmother.She smiled, but she made no reply. Even, she liked it, for the positionof a superior dispensing favours had been natural to her all her life,and the power to retain this position was not one of the leastadvantages that Edgar's liberality gave her. But even while she likedit, she saw through the much less noble sentiment of her descendants,and a passing pang mingled with her pleasure. She said nothing to Dr.Charles; but when Edgar gave her his arm for the brief evening walkwhich she took before going to rest, she made to him a curious apologyfor the rest. Charles was standing on the loch-side looking out,half-jealous that it was Edgar who naturally took charge of the oldmother, and half glad to escape out of Edgar's way."We mustna judge them by ourselves," she said, in a deprecating tone."Charlie was aye a weak lad, meaning no harm--and used to depend uponsomebody. Edgar, they are not to be judged like you and me.""No," said Edgar, with a smile; then rapidly passing from the subjectwhich he could not enter on. "Does he want to marry Jeanie?" he asked."That I canna tell--that I do not know. He cannot keep his eyes off herbonnie face; but, Edgar, the poor lad has strange fancies. He has takenit into his head to be genteel--and Marg'ret, poor thing, is genteel.""What has that to do with it?" said Edgar, laughing."We are not genteel, Jeanie and me," said the old woman, with a gleam ofhumour. "But, Edgar, my man, still you must not judge Charlie. You are agentleman, that nobody could have any doubt of; but the danger of beinga poor man's son, and brought up to be a gentleman, is that you're neversure of yourself. You are always in a fear to know if you are behavingright--if you are doing something you ought not to do.""Then, perhaps," said Edgar, "my cousin would have been happier if hehad not been brought up, as you say, to be a gentleman.""What could I make him? Farming's but a poor trade for them that havelittle capital and little energy. Maybe you will say a Minister? butit's a responsibility bringing up a young man to be a Minister, whenmaybe he will have no turn that way but just seek a priest's office fora piece of bread. A good doctor serves both God and man; and Charlie isnot an ill doctor," she added, hurriedly. "His very weakness gives him asoft manner, and as he's aye on the outlook whether he's pleasing you ornot, it makes him quick to notice folk's feelings in general. Sick men,and still more sick women, like that.""You are a philosopher, grandmother," said Edgar."Na, na, not that," said the old woman; "but at seventy you must kensomething of your fellow-creature's ways, or you must be a poor creatureindeed."Meanwhile Charles Murray had gone back to the house, and was talking toJeanie, who for some reason which she did not herself quite divine, hadbeen shy of venturing out this special evening with the others. Perhapsthe young doctor thought she was waiting for him. At all events it was arelief to go and talk to one in whom no criticism could be."You feel quite strong and well again, Jeanie?" he said."Oh yes, quite strong and well--quite better," she said, looking up athim with that soft smile of subjection and dependence which most peopleto whom it is addressed find so sweet."You should not say quite better," he said, smiling too, though thephrase would by times steal even from his own educated lips. "I wondersometimes, Jeanie, after passing some months in England as you did, thatyou should still continue so Scotch. I like it, of course--in a way."Here Jeanie, whose face had overcast, brightened again and smiled--asmile which this time, however, did not arrest him in his criticalcareer."I like it, in a way," said Charles, doubtfully. "Here on Loch Arrochside it is very sweet, and appropriate to the place; but if you weregoing out--into the world, Jeanie.""No fear of that," said Jeanie, with a soft laugh."On the contrary, there is much fear of it--or much hope of it, Ishould say. There are many men who would give all they have in the worldfor a smile from your sweet face. I mean," said the young man,withdrawing half a step backward, and toning himself down from thisextravagance, "I mean that there is no doubt you could marryadvantageously--if you liked to exert yourself.""You should not speak like that to me," cried Jeanie, with a sudden hotflush; "there is nothing of the kind in my head.""Say your mind, not your head, Jeanie; and like the dear good girl youare, say head, not heed," said Dr. Charles with a curious mixture ofannoyance and admiration; and then he added, drawing closer. "Jeanie, doyou not think you would like to go to school?""To school? I am not a little bairn," said Jeanie with some indignation,"I have had my schooling, all that Granny thought I wanted. Besides,"she continued proudly, "I must look after Granny now.""She has asked Margaret to come to her," said the young man, "and don'tyou think, Jeanie, if you could be sent to a school for a time--not tolearn much you know, not for lessons or anything of that kind; but toget more used to the world, and to what you would have to encounter ifyou went into the world--and perhaps to get a few accomplishments, alittle French, or the piano, or something like that?""What would I do, learning French and the piano?" said Jeanie; hercountenance had over-clouded during the first part of his speech, butgradually gave way to wonder and amusement as he went on. "Are youthinking of Jeanie MacKell who can play tunes, and speak such fineEnglish? Granny would not like that, and neither would I.""But Granny is not the only person in the world," he said, "there areothers who would like it. Men like it, Jeanie; they like to see theirwife take her place with anyone, and you cannot always be withGranny--you will marry some day."Jeanie's fair soft countenance glowed like the setting sun, a bright andtender consciousness lit up her features; her blue eyes shone. Dr.Charles, who had his back to the loch, as he stood at the farm-housedoor, did not perceive that Edgar had come into sight with Mrs. Murrayleaning on his arm."May-be all that may be true," said Jeanie, "I cannot tell; but in themeantime I cannot leave Granny, for Granny has nobody but me.""She has asked my sister Margaret, as I told you--""Margaret instead of me!" said Jeanie, with a slight tone of wonder."It is strange how disagreeable you all are to my sister," said Dr.Charles with some impatience. "It need not be instead of you; but Grannyhas asked Margaret, and she and the little one will come perhaps beforewinter sets in--the change would do them good. I should be left alonethen," he said, softening, "and if Margaret stays with Granny, I shouldbe left always alone. Jeanie, if you would but get a little educationand polish, and make yourself more like what a man wishes his wife tobe--"Jeanie was looking behind him all the time with a vague dreamy smileupon her face. "If that is a' he wants!" she said dreamily to herself.She was thinking not of the man before her, whose heart, such as it was,was full of her image; but of the other man approaching, who did notthink of Jeanie except as a gentle and affectionate child. If that wasa' he wanted! though even in her imaginative readiness to findeverything sublime that Edgar did, there passed through Jeanie's mind avague pang to think that he would pay more regard to French and thepiano, than to her tender enthusiast passion, the innocent adoration ofher youth."If you would do that, Jeanie--to please me!" said the unconscious youngDoctor, taking her hand."Here is Granny coming," said Jeanie hastily, "and--Mr. Edgar. Go benthe house, please, and never mind me. I have to see that the rooms areright and all ready. Are you tired, Granny? You have had a sore day. Mr.Edgar, say good night to her now, she ought to go to her bed."Thus Dr. Charles was thrust aside at the moment when he was about tocommit himself. Jeanie put him away as if he had been a ploughman, orshe a fine lady used to the fine art of easy impertinence. So littlethought had she of him at all, that she was not aware of thecarelessness with which she had received his semi-declaration, and whilehe withdrew stung all over as by mental nettles, abashed, insulted, andfurious, she went innocently upstairs, without the faintest idea of theoffence she had given. And Edgar went into the parlour after his cousinhumming an air, with the freshness of the fields about him. Theinsouciance of the one who had that day given away his living, and thedisturbed and nervous trouble of the other, self-conscious to his veryfinger points, irritated by a constant notion that he was despised andlightly thought of, made the strangest possible contrast between them,notwithstanding a certain family resemblance in their looks."I am staying to-night," said Dr. Charles, with a certain abruptness,and that tone of irritated apology which mingled more or less in all hesaid, "because it is too late for me to get home.""And I am staying," said Edgar, "because it is too late to start, I mustgo to-morrow. I suppose our road lies so far in the same direction.""You can get the London express at Glasgow, or even Greenock. I am goingto Edinburgh.""I have business in Edinburgh too," said Edgar. He was so good-humoured,so friendly, that it was very hard to impress upon him the fact that hiscompanion regarded him in no friendly light."You will leave the loch with very pleasant feelings," said Dr. Charles,"very different to the rest of us. Fortune has given you thesuperiority. What I would have done and couldn't, you have been able todo. It is hard not to grudge a little at such an advantage. The man whohas nothing feels himself always so inferior to the man who hassomething, however small.""Do you think so?" said Edgar, "my experience would not lead me to thatconclusion; and few people can have greater experience. Once I supposedmyself to be rather rich. I tumbled down from that all in a moment, andnow I have nothing at all; but it seems to me I am the same man as whenI was a small potentate in my way, thinking rather better than worse ofmyself, if truth must be told," he added with a laugh."I wish I had your nothing at all," said Dr. Charles, bitterly; "to usreally poor people that is much, which seems little to you.""Well," said Edgar, with a shrug of his shoulders, "my poverty isabsolute, not comparative now. And you have a profession, while I havenone. On the whole, whatever there may be to choose between us, you musthave the best of it; for to tell the truth I am in the dismal positionof not knowing what to do.""To do! what does it matter? you have enough to live upon.""I have nothing to live upon," said Edgar, with a smile.The young men looked at each other, one with a half-amusement in hisface, the other full of wonder and consternation. "You don't mean tosay," he asked, with a gasp, "that you have given her all?""I have no income left," said Edgar. "I have some debts, unfortunately,like most men. Now a man who has no income has no right to have anydebts. That is about my sole maxim in political economy. I must pay themoff, and then I shall have fifty pounds or so left.""Good heavens!" said the other, "and you take this quite easily withoutanxiety----""Anxiety will not put anything in my pocket, or teach me a profession,"said Edgar. "Don't let's talk of it, 'Sufficient unto the day is theevil there-of.'""But," cried the other, almost wildly, "in that case all of us--I too--""Don't say anything more about it," said Edgar. "We all act according toimpulses. Perhaps it is well for those who have no impulses; but onecannot help one's self. I should like to start by the early boatto-morrow morning, and before I go I have something to say to Jeanie.""I fear I am in your way," cried Dr. Charles, rising hastily, with thefeeling, which was rather pleasant to him than otherwise, that at lasthe had a real reason for taking offence."Oh, dear no, not at all. It is only to give her some advice about ourold mother," said Edgar; but they both reddened as they stood frontingeach other, Charles from wild and genuine jealousy--Edgar, from adisagreeable and impatient consciousness of the silly speeches which hadassociated his name with that of Jeanie. He stood for a momentuncertain, and then his natural frankness broke forth, "Look here," hesaid, "don't let us make any mistake. I don't know what your feelingsmay be about Jeanie, but mine are those of an elder brother--a very muchelder brother," he went on, with a laugh, "to a child.""Every man says that, until the moment comes when he feels differently,"said Charles, in his uneasy didactic way."Does he? then that moment will never come for me," said Edgar,carelessly.Poor little Jeanie! she had opened the door, the two young men notobserving her in their preoccupation, and Edgar's words came fully intoher heart like a volley of musketry. She stood behind them for a momentin the partial gloom--for they were standing between her and the lightof the feeble candles--unnoticed, holding the door. Then noiselessly shestole back, closing it, her heart all riddled by that chance discharge,wounded and bleeding. Then she went to the kitchen softly, and calledBell. "My head's sair," she said, which on Loch Arroch means, my headaches. "Will you see if they want anything in the parlour, Bell?""My poor lamb!" said Bell, "I wish it beena your heart that's sair. Yeare as white as a ghost. Go to your bed, my bonnie woman, and I'll seeafter them, Lord bless us, what a bit white face! Go to your bed, anddinna let your Granny see you like that. Oh ay! I'll see to the twomen."Jeanie crept up-stairs like a mouse, noiseless in the dark staircase.She needed no light, and to hide herself seemed so much the most naturalthing to do. White! Jeanie felt as if her face must be scorched as herheart seemed to be. Why should he have volunteered this profession ofindifference? It seemed so much the worse because it was uncalled for.Did anyone say he cared for her? Had any one accused him of being "fond"of Jeanie? Shame seemed to take possession of the little soft creature.Had she herself done anything to put such a degrading idea into hismind? Why should he care for her? "I never asked him--I never wantedhim," poor Jeanie cried to herself.Edgar never knew the second great effect he had produced on thiseventful day. When Jeanie appeared at the early breakfast before he setout next morning, he was honestly concerned to see how pale she looked."My poor dear child, you are ill," he cried, drawing her towards him,and his look of anxious kindness struck poor Jeanie like a blow."I'm not ill. It's my head. It's nothing," she said, starting away fromhim. Edgar looked at her with mild astonished eyes."You are not vexed with me this last morning? Take care of the dear oldmother, Jeanie--but I know you will do that--and write to me sometimesto say she is well; and talk of me sometimes, as you promised--youremember?"His kind friendly words broke Jeanie's heart. "Oh, how can you look sopleased and easy in your mind!" she said, turning, as was natural, theirritation of her personal pain into the first possible channel, "whenyou know you are going away without a penny, for our sake--for hersake----""And yours," Edgar added cheerily. "That is what makes me easy in mymind."And he smiled, and took both her hands, and kissed her on the forehead,a salutation which made little Scotch Jeanie--little used to suchcaresses--flame crimson with shame. Charles Murray looked on with sullenfury. He dared not do as much. This way of saying farewell was notcousinly or brotherly to him.CHAPTER VIII.A Railway Journey: The Scotch Express.The two young men set out together from Loch Arroch. The old lady whosechildren they both were, waved her handkerchief to them from her windowas the steamer rustled down the loch, and round the windy corner of thestubble field into Loch Long. They stood on the deck, and gazed at thequiet scene they were leaving till the farmhouse and the ruin died outof sight. How peaceful it all looked in the bright but watery sunshine!The ivy waving softly from the walls of the ruin, the smoke rising bluefrom the roof of the farmhouse, which nestled under the shadow of theold castle, the stooks standing in the pale field glistening withmorning dew. Bell stood at the door in her short petticoats, shading hereyes with one hand as she watched them, and old Mrs. Murray showed asmiling, mournful face at her window, and the long branches of thefuchsias waved and made salutations with all their crimson bells. EvenBell's shadow had a distinct importance in the scene, which was sostill--still as the rural country is between mountain and water, withmysterious shadows flitting in the silence, and strange ripples upon thebeach. The scene was still more sweet from the shore, though not soentirely enveloped in this peaceable habitual calm; for great Benvohrlanwas kept in constant life with moving clouds which crossed the sunshine;and the eyes of the spectators on the land did not disdain the bright,many-coloured boat, floating, as it seemed, between three elements--thewater, the mountain, and the sky. The shadow-ship floated over the sideof the shadow-hill among all the reflected shades; it floated doublelike the swan on St. Mary's Lake, and it was hard to tell which was thereality and which the symbol. Such were the variations of the scene fromthe loch and from the shore.But though Bell was visible and Bell's mistress, Jeanie was not to beseen. She had disappeared within the ruins of the Castle, and watchedthe boat from behind an old block of masonry, with eyes full of longingand sadness. Why had she been so harsh, so hard? Why had she not partedwith him "friends?" What did it matter what he said, so long as he saidthat he looked upon her as an elder brother? Was it not better to beEdgar's sister than any other man's beloved? She cried, reflecting sadlythat she had not been so kind, so gentle as she ought to this man whowas so unlike all others. Like an elder brother--what more could shewish for? Thus poor little Jeanie began to dree her fate.The day was fine, notwithstanding the prophecy of "saft weather" withwhich all the observers of sea and sky in the West of Scotland keep uptheir character as weather prophets as Edgar and Charles Murraytravelled to Edinburgh. There was no subject of quarrel between them,therefore they did not quarrel; indeed Edgar, for his part, was amused,when he was not pained, by his cousin's perpetual self-consciousness andpainful desire to keep up his profession of gentleman, and conducthimself in all details of behaviour as a gentleman should. The youngDoctor nervously unbuttoned his over-coat, which was much more spruceand glossy than Edgar's, when he observed that his companion, never amodel of neatness or order, wore his loose. He looked with nervousobservation at Edgar's portmanteau, at the shape and size of hisumbrella. Edgar had lived in the great world; he had been (or so atleast his cousin thought) fashionable; therefore Dr. Charles gave apainful regard to all the minuti of his appearance. Thus a trim poorgirl might copy a tawdry duchess, knowing no better--might, but seldomdoes, having a better instinct. But if any one had breathed into CharlesMurray's ear a suggestion of what he was consciously (yet almost againsthis will) doing, he would have forgiven an accusation of crime morereadily. He knew his own weakness, and the knowledge made him wretched;but had any one else suspected it, that would have been the height ofinsult, and would have roused him to desperate passion.Thus they travelled together, holding but little communication. Theyoung Doctor's destination was one of the smaller stations before theyreached Edinburgh, where Edgar saw, as the train approached, a gracefulyoung woman, with that air of refinement which a slim and tall figuregives, but too far off to be recognizable, accompanied by a littlegirl--waiting by the roadside in a little open carriage, half phaeton,half gig."Is that your sister?" he asked, taking off his hat, as the lady wavedher hand towards them."Yes," said Dr. Charles, shortly, and he added, in his usual tone ofapology, "a doctor can do nothing without a conveyance, and as I had toget one, and Margaret is so delicate, it was better to have something inwhich she could drive with me.""Surely," said Edgar, with some wonder at the appealing tone in whichthis half statement, half question was made. But a little sigh came fromhis heart, against his will, as he saw Charles Murray's welcome, andfelt himself rolled away into the cold, into the unknown, without anyone to bear him company. He too had once had, or thought he had, asister, and enjoyed for a short time that close, tender, and familiarfriendship which only can exist between a young man and woman when theyare thus closely related. Edgar, who was foolishly soft-hearted, hadgone about the world ever since, missing this, without knowing what itwas he missed. He was fond of the society of women, and he had been shutout from it; for he neither wished to marry, nor was rich enough so toindulge himself, and people with daughters, as he found, were not soanxious to invite a poor man, nor so complacent towards him as they hadbeen when he was rich. To be sure he had met women as he had met men atthe foreign towns which he had chiefly frequented during the aimlessyears just past; but these were chiefly old campaigners, with all thefreshness dried out of them, ground down into the utmost narrowness oflimit in which the mind is capable of being restrained, or else at theopposite extreme, liberated in an alarming way from all the decorums andprejudices of life. Neither of these classes were attractive, thoughthey amused him, each in its way.But somehow the sight of his two cousins, brother and sister, gave him apang which was all the sharper for being entirely unexpected. It madehim feel his own forlornness and solitude, how cut off he was from allhuman solace and companionship. Into his ancient surroundings he couldnot return; and his present family, the only one which he had any claimupon, was distasteful beyond description. Even his grandmother andJeanie, whom he had known longest, and with whom he felt a certainsympathy, were people so entirely out of his sphere, that hisintercourse with them never could be easy nor carried on on equal terms.He admired Mrs. Murray's noble character, and was proud to have beenable to stand by her against her sordid relations; he even loved her ina way, but did not, could not adopt the ways of thinking, the mannersand forms of existence, which were natural and seemly in the littlefarm-house.As for Jeanie, poor, gentle, pretty Jeanie! A slight flush came overEdgar's face as her name occurred to him; he was no lady-killer, proudto think that he had awakened a warmer feeling than was safe for her inthe girl's heart. On the contrary, he was not only pained, but ashamedof himself for the involuntary consciousness which he never put intowords, that perhaps it was better for Jeanie that he should go away. Hedismissed the thought, feeling hot and ashamed. Was it some latentcoxcombry on his part that brought such an idea into his head?His business in Edinburgh was of a simple kind, to see the lawyer whohad prepared the papers for the transfer of his little income, and who,knowing his history, was curious and interested in him, asked him todinner, and would have made much of the strange young man who haddescended from the very height of prosperity, and now had denudedhimself of the last humble revenue upon which he could depend."I have ventured to express my disapproval, Mr. Earnshaw," this good manhad said; "but having done so, and cleared my conscience if--there isanything I can be of use to you in, tell me.""Nothing," said Edgar; "but a thousand thanks for the goodwill, which isbetter than anything."Then he went away, declining the invitation, and walked about Edinburghin the dreamy solitude which began to be habitual to him, friendly andsocial as his nature was. In the evening he dined alone in one of thePrinces Street hotels, near a window which looked out upon the Castleand the old town, all glimmering with lights in the soft darkness, whichwas just touched with frost. The irregular twinkle of the lightsscattered about upon the fine bank of towers and spires and housesopposite; the dark depth below, where dark trees rustled, and straylights gleamed here and there; the stream of traffic always pouringthrough the street below, notwithstanding the picturesque landscape onthe other side--all attracted Edgar with the charm which they exerciseon every sensitive mind. When the bugle sounded low and sweet up inmid-air from the Castle, he started up as if that visionary note hadbeen for him. The darkness and the lights, the new and the old, seemedto him alike a dream, and he not less a dream pursuing his way betweenthem, not sure which was real and which fictitious in his own life;which present and which past. The bugle called him--to what? Not to thesober limits of duty, to obedience and to rest, as it called theunwilling soldiers out of their riots and amusements; but perhaps to asreal a world still unknown to him, compassed--like the dark Castle,standing deep in undistinguishable, rustling trees--with mists anddream-like uncertainty. Who has ever sat at a dark window looking outupon the gleaming, darkling crest of that old Edinburgh, with the crownof St. Giles hovering over it in the blue, and the Castle half way up toheaven, without feeling something weird and mystical beyond words, inthe call of the bugle, sudden, sweet, and penetrating, out of theclouds? What Edgar had to do after the call of this bugle was no deed ofhigh emprise. He had no princess to rescue, no dragon to kill. He got upwith that half-laugh at himself and his own fancies which was habitualto him, and paid his bill and collected his few properties, and went tothe railway. Other people were beginning to go to bed; the shop windowswere closing; the lights mounting higher from story to story. But astream of people and carriages was pouring steadily down into thehollow, bound like himself, for the London Express. Edgar walked upnaturally, mechanically to the window at which firstclass tickets werebeing issued. But while he waited his turn, his eye and his ear wereattracted by a couple of women in the dress of an English Sisterhood,who were standing in front of him, holding a close conversation. One ofthem, at least, was in the nun's costume of severe black and white; theother, a young slim figure, wore a black cloak and close bonnet, and wasdeeply veiled; but was not a "Sister," though in dress closelyapproaching the garb. Edgar's eyes however were not clever enough tomake out this difference. The younger one seemed to him to have madesome timid objection to the second class."Second class, my dear!" said the elder. "I understand first class, andI understand third; but second is neither one thing nor another. No, mydear. If we profess to give up forms and ceremonies and the pomps ofthis world, let us do it thoroughly, or not at all. If you take secondclass, you will be put in with your friend's maid and footman. No, no,no; third class is the thing.""To be sure. What am I thinking of?" said Edgar to himself, with hishabitual smile. "Of course, third class is the thing."It had been from pure inadvertence that he had been about to take themost expensive place, nothing else having occurred to him. I do not knowwhether I can make the reader understand how entirely withoutbitterness, and, indeed, with how much amusement Edgar contemplatedhimself in his downfall and penniless condition, and what a joke hefound it. For the moment rather a good joke--for, indeed, he hadsuffered nothing, his amour propre not being any way involved, and noimmediate want of a five-pound note or a shilling having yet happened tohim to ruffle his composure. He kept the two Sisters in sight as he wentdown the long stairs to the railway with his third-class ticket. Hethought it possible that they might be exposed to some annoyance, twowomen in so strange a garb, and in a country where Sisterhoods have notyet developed, and where the rudeness of the vulgar is doubly rude,perhaps in contrast with, perhaps in consequence of (who knows?) thegeneral higher level of education on which we Scotch plume ourselves.They had given him his first lesson in practical contempt of the world;he would give them the protection of his presence, at least, in case ofany annoyance. Not to give them any reason, however, to suppose that hewas following them, he waited for some minutes before he took his seatin a corner of the same carriage in which they had establishedthemselves. He took off his hat, foreign fashion, as he went into therailway carriage (Edgar had many foreign fashions). At sight of himthere seemed a little flutter of interest between the Sisters, and whenhe took his seat they bent their heads together, and talked long inwhispers. The result of this was that the two changed seats, the youngerone taking the further corner of the same seat on which he had placedhimself; while the elder, a cheerful middle-aged woman, whose comelycountenance became the close white cap, and whose pleasant smile did ithonour, sat opposite to her companion.I cannot say that this arrangement pleased Edgar, for the other wasyoung--a fact which betrayed itself rather by some subtle atmosphereabout her than by any visible sign--and his curiosity was piqued andhimself interested to see the veiled maiden. But, after all, thedisappointment was not great, and he leaned back in the hard corner,saying to himself that the third class might be the thing, but was notvery comfortable, without any particular dissatisfaction.Two other travellers, a woman and a boy, took their places opposite tohim. They were people from London, who had gone to Scotland for theboy's holidays after some illness, and they brought a bag of sandwicheswith them and a bottle of bad sherry, of which they ate and drank assoon as the train started, preparing themselves for the night. Thenthese two went to sleep and snored, and Edgar, too, went partially tosleep, dozing between the stations, lying back in the corner which wasso hard, and seeing the dim lamp sway, and the wooden box in which hewas confined, creak, and jolt, and roll about as the train rushed on,clamping and striding like a giant through the dark. What a curious,prolonged dream it was--the dim, uncertain light swaying like a light atsea, the figures dimly seen, immoveable, or turning uneasily likespectres in a fever, veiled figures, with little form visible under theswaying of the lamp; and now and then the sudden jar and pause, theunearthly and dissipated gleam from some miserable midnight station,where the porters ran about pale and yawning, and the whole sleepy,weary place did its best to thrust them on, and get rid of the intruder.Just before morning, however, in the cold before the dawning, Edgar hada real dream, a dream of sleep, and not of waking, so vivid that it cameinto his mind often afterwards with a thrill of wonder. He dreamt thathe saw standing by him the figure of her who had touched his heart inhis earlier years, of Gussy, who might have been his wife had all gonewell, and of whom he had thought more warmly and constantly, perhaps,since she became impossible to him, than when she was within his reach.She seemed to come to him out of a cloud, out of a mist, stooping overhim with a smile; but when he tried to spring up, to take the hand whichshe held out, some icy restraint came upon him--he could not move,chains of ice seemed to bind his hands and arrest even his voice in histhroat. While he struggled to rise, the beautiful figure glided away,saying, "After, after--but not yet!" and--strange caprice offancy--dropped over her face the heavy veil of the young sister who hadexcited his curiosity, and who was seated in the other corner of thissame hard wooden bench, just as Edgar, struggling up, half awake, foundthat his railway wrapper had dropped from his knees, and that he wasindeed almost motionless with cold.The grey dawn was breaking, coldest and most miserable hour of thetwenty-four, and the other figures round him were nodding in theirsleep, or swayed about with the jarring movement of the carriage.Strange, Edgar thought to himself, how fancy can pick up an externalcircumstance, and weave it into the fantastic web of dreams! Hownaturally his dream visitor had taken the aspect of the last figure hismusing eyes had closed upon! and how naturally, too, the physical chillof the moment had shaped itself into a mental impossibility--a chain offate. He smiled at the combination as he wrapped himself shivering inhis rug. The slight little figure in the other corner was, he thought,awake too, she was so perfectly still. The people on the other sidedozed and nodded, changing their positions with the jerking movement ofrestless sleep, but she was still, moving only with the swaying of thecarriage. Her veil was still down, but one little white hand came forthout of the opening of her black cloak. What a pity that so pretty a handshould not be given to some man to help him along the road of life,Edgar thought to himself with true English sentiment, and then paused toremember that English sisterhoods could take no irrevocable vows, atleast, in law. He toyed with this idea, he could not tell why, givingfar more attention to the veiled figure than half-a-dozen unveiled womenwould have procured from him.Foolish and short-sighted mortal! He dreamed and wondered at his dream,and made his ingenious little theory and amused explanation to himselfof the mutual reaction of imagination and sensation. How little he knewwhat eyes were watching him from behind the safe shelter of that heavyblack veil!CHAPTER IX.Alone.Edgar did not well know where to go on his arrival in London. He knewnothing about London except in its most expensive regions, and the onlyplace to which he could direct the driver of the cab into which hejumped, was the chambers in Piccadilly which he had occupied in hisearlier days. He said to himself "For a day or two it cannot matterwhere I live;" and, besides, the season was over and everything cheap,or so, at least, Edgar thought.The first thing he had to do was to see that his lawyers had carried outhis directions and paid his debts--the number of which appalled him--outof his capital. Decidedly it was time that he should do something, andshould shake himself out of those habits of a rich man, which had, inthese three years, though he had no idea of it, compromised him to theextent of half his little fortune. This debt he felt he could not triflewith. The more indifferent he was about money, and the better able hewas to do without it, the more necessity was there for the clearing offto begin with, of everything in the shape of debt. After all was paid,and the residue settled on the old lady at Loch Arroch, there remainedto him about a hundred pounds in the bank, besides the two ten-poundnotes which he had in his pocket-book. "I must not touch the money inthe bank," he said to himself, with a prudence which contrastedbeautifully with his other extravagances, "that must remain as somethingto fall back upon. Suppose, for instance, I should be ill," Edgarreasoned with himself, always with a delicious suppressed consciousnessof the joke involved under the utter gravity and extreme reasonablenessof his own self-communings, "how necessary it would be to have somethingto fall back upon!" When he had made this little speech to himself, hesubsided into silence, and it was not until half-an-hour later that hepermitted himself to laugh.Both of his own suggestions seemed so oddly impossible to him. To beill--he, in whose veins the blood ran so lightly, so tunefully, hispulse beating with the calm and continued strength of perfect harmony;or to want a pound or two--he who had possessed unlimited credit andmeans which he had never exhausted all his life. The change was so greatthat it affected him almost childishly--as a poor man might be affectedby coming into a sudden fortune, or as a very young wife is sometimesaffected by the bewildering and laughable, yet certain fact, that she,the other day only a little girl in pinafores, is now at the head of ahouse, free to give as many orders as she pleases, and sure to beobeyed. The extreme humour of the situation is the first thing thatstrikes a lively girl, under these circumstances, and it was the humourof it which struck Edgar: a fact, perhaps, which may lower his characterin the reader's eyes. But that, alas, I cannot help, for such as he was,such I must show him, and his character had many defects. Often had hebeen upbraided that he did not feel vicissitudes which looked like ruinand destruction to minds differently constituted. He did not--he was themost insouciant, the most care-hating of men. Up to this period of hislife he had found the means, somehow, of getting a smile, or some gleamof fun, out of everything that happened. When he could not manage thisthe circumstances were very strange indeed, and I suppose he felt it;but at all events, in such cases, he kept his failure to himself.As soon as he had refreshed himself and breakfasted, he went out to seehis lawyer, who received him with that air of melancholy disappointmentwhich distinguishes all agents who are compelled to carry out what theythink the foolish will of their principals: but who submitted theaccounts to him, which showed that his directions had been obeyed,explaining everything in a depressed and despondent voice, full of thesense of injury."I am compelled to say, Mr. Earnshaw," said this good man, "that, as youhave paid so little attention to our wishes, I and my firm wouldhence-forward have declined to take charge of your businesstransactions, if it had been the least likely that you would have hadany more business to do; but as this is not possible, or at leastprobable--""You will continue to do it," said Edgar, laughing. "I hope so; it wouldbe kind of you. No, I don't suppose I shall have much more business todo.""And may I ask without offence," said Mr. Parchemin, who was an oldfriend of Edgar's old friend, Mr. Farqakerley, and had taken up thefoolish young fellow on the recommendation of that excellent andlong-established family solicitor. "May I ask how, now you have givenaway all your money, you mean to live?""I must work," said Edgar, cheerfully."Clearly; but what can you work at?""You have hit the difficulty exactly," said Edgar, laughing. "To tellthe truth, I don't know. What do you suppose I could do best? There mustbe many men in my position, left in the lurch by circumstances--and theymust have some way of providing for themselves. What do they generallydo?""Go to the dogs," said Mr. Parchemin, succinctly, for he was stilloffended, and had not yet forgiven his impracticable client."I sha'n't do that," said Edgar as briefly--and with, for the firsttime, and for one of the first times in his life, a shade of offence onhis face."There are a good many other things they try to do," said Mr. Parchemin;"for instance they take pupils--most men feel themselves capable of thatwhen they are driven to it; or they get into a public office, if theyhave interest and can pass the examination; or they read for the bar ifthey have friends who can support them for a dozen years; or they writefor the papers--""Stop a little," said Edgar; "I have no friends to support me--I can'twrite--I don't think I could pass an examination--""After twenty, and unless you've been crammed for the purpose, I don'tknow anyone who could," said Mr. Parchemin, solemnly."And I doubt whether I could teach anything that any man in his senseswould wish to know.""I doubt it also," said the lawyer, "judging, if you will pardon me forsaying so, by your guidance of your own affairs.""But a tutor does not teach boys how to guide their own affairs," saidEdgar, recovering his sense of the joke."That is true too. A man may be very wise in giving good advice, andadmirable on paper, and yet be fool enough in other respects. There wasGoldsmith, for instance. But why shouldn't you write? Plenty of stupidfellows write in the papers. You are not stupid--""Thanks," cried Edgar, laughing."Of course, you have read what Thackeray says on that subject--in'Pendennis,' you know--how it is all a knack that anybody can learn; andit pays very well, I have always heard. There is no sort of nonsensethat people will not read. I don't see why you should not try thenewspapers; if you know any one on the staff of the Times, forinstance--that is a splendid opening--or even the News or theTelegraph.""But, alas, I don't know anyone.""Do you mean to say you never met any of those press fellows? when youwere a great man, you know, when you were fashionable? At your club, forinstance? You must have met some of them. Think! Why, they goeverywhere, it's their trade; they must have news. And, by the way, theyhave made their own of you first and last; the Arden estate, and thelaw-suit that was to be, and the noble behaviour of the unfortunategentleman, &c., &c. You have figured in many a paragraph. Some of themyou must know.""Newmarch used to dabble in literature," said Edgar, doubtfully."Newmarch--Lord Newmarch! Why, that is better still. He's in theMinistry, a rising young fellow, with the Manchester interest, and a fewhundred thousands a-year behind him. He's your very man; he'll get yousomething; a school-inspectorship, or something of that sort, at thevery least. What is he, by-the-bye? Education and that sort of thing ishis hobby, so, of course, he's put somewhere, like Dogberry, where thereshall be no occasion for such vanities. Ah! I thought so; ForeignOffice. He knows about as much of foreign politics, my dear Sir, as myoffice boy. That's why he's put in; that's the present people's way.""I don't think I should like to ask a favour of Newmarch," said Edgar,with hesitation; and there suddenly rose in his mind a spiritualpresence which he had never before recognised nor expected to see, asomething which was Pride. He himself was so unaffectedly surprised bythe apparition that he did not know how to encounter it; but sat silent,wondering, and unable to understand the new dilemma in which he foundhimself. No; Newmarch was the last person of whom he should like to aska favour, he said to himself."Is there any one else whom you would like better?" said Mr. Parchemin,somewhat satirically. "So far as we have got, Lord Newmarch's is muchthe most practicable aid you could get. Would you prefer to ask yourfavour from anyone else?""You are quite right," said Edgar, rousing himself. "The fact is, Idon't like asking favours at all. I suppose I expected the world to cometo me and offer me a living, hat in hand. Of course, it is absurd.""Lord Newmarch is probably too high and mighty to prefer a friend unlesshe is sure it will be for the public interest, etc.," said Mr.Parchemin. "He will say as much, at least, you may be sure of that. AndI advise you to be prepared for a great deal of this sort of loftyrubbish; but don't pay any attention to it. Don't take offence."Edgar laughed; but the laugh was unexplainable to anyone but himself. Hehad not been in the habit of taking offence; he had never borne anybodya grudge, so far as he knew, in his life; but along with the new-bornpride which had arisen in him, was the faculty of offence coming too?These were the first fruits of poverty, spectres which had nevercrossed his sunny pathway before. And though he laughed, not withamusement, but in a kind of dazed acknowledgment of the incongruity ofthings, the sense of the joke began to fail in Edgar's mind. Thewhimsical, pleasant fun of the whole proceeding disappeared before thoseapparitions of Anger and Pride. Alas, was it possible that such a vulgarmaterial change as the loss of money could bring such evil things intobeing? His friendly, gentle soul was appalled. He laughed with pain, notwith amusement, because of the strange unlikeness of this new state ofmind to anything he had known before."Newmarch, I suppose, is not in town; he can't be in town at this timeof the year," he said, with a momentary hope of postponing hissufferings at least."Ah, my dear Sir," said the lawyer, "he is one of the new brooms thatsweep clean. Besides, there is something going on between Russia andPrussia that wants watching, and it's Lord Newmarch's business to be onthe spot. If you'll take my advice, you'll see him at once. Before theseason begins he can't have so many applicants. Go, if you'll take myadvice, at once."Edgar winced, as a man cannot but wince who is thrown into the class of"applicants" at a blow. Why shouldn't he be an applicant? he said tohimself as he went out. Better men than he had been obliged to kicktheir heels in great men's anterooms; but fortunately the reign ofpatrons was so far over now. Was it over? While human nature continuedcould it ever be over? or would it not be necessary as long as the worldlasted that there should be some men holding out the hand to ask, andothers to give? Not so very long ago Lord Newmarch had come to him,Edgar, hat in hand, so to speak, wanting not place or living, but thegood graces of a rich and fair young lady with whom her brother mightadvance him. Her brother! There gleamed up before Edgar, as he walkedthrough the dusty October streets, the sudden glimpse he had seen at theroadside station of Margaret waiting for her brother. Alas, yes! Mostpeople had sisters, if not something still dearer, to greet them, tohear the account of all they had done, and consult what remained to do.I do not know how it was that at this moment something brought intoEdgar's mind the two ladies who had travelled with him from Scotland.Probably the mere word Sister was enough; or perhaps it was because oneof them, the elder, was just turning the corner of the street, and methim two minutes after. She smiled with a momentary hesitation (she wasforty at the least), and then stopped to speak."I had not a chance to thank you for getting our cab and looking afterour luggage. It was very kind; but my young friend was in a greathurry.""She was, I suppose, of your sisterhood, too," said Edgar, with acuriosity which was quite unjustifiable, and for which he could notaccount."Who? Miss ----. Oh! dear no," said the good-humoured Sister. "She iswhat we call an associate, and does what she can for our charges, thepoor people--in something like our dress; but it is far from being thedress of a professed sister," the excellent woman added, adjusting hercross and collar. "I daresay you will meet her some day in society, andyou need not tell her great friends that a Sister of the Charity Housemade her travel third class. We always do it; but fine people do notlike to know.""I should have to betray myself," said Edgar laughing, "if I betrayedyou.""That is true," said the Sister. "If you ever pass by the Charity Houseat Amerton ask for Sister Susan, and I shall be glad to show you overit. I assure you it is something to see.""I shall come some day or other," said Edgar, not quite knowing what hesaid. Who was she then, the girl with the veil who kept herself shroudedfrom him? She had not seemed farouche or unfriendly. She had waitedquietly while he did what he could for them at the railway station. Shehad even touched his hand lightly as he put her into the cab; but therehad seemed to be three or four veils between him and her countenance.During all the long journey he had seen of her nothing but the littlewhite hand stealing from under the cover of her cloak; but somehow hisdream came back to him, and wove itself in with the semblance of thisveiled stranger. Absurd! but sometimes an absurdity is pleasant andcomforting, and so it was in this case. He could not have said whatfancies came into his head, or if he had any fancies. No, he was pastdreaming, past all that kind of boyish nonsense, he said to himself. Butyet the recollection of the veiled maiden was pleasant to him, he couldscarcely have told why.Lord Newmarch was at his office, and he was ready after some time to seehis visitor, whom he greeted with sufficient friendliness and goodfeeling. Lord Newmarch had been very democratic in his day; he had takenworkmen in their working clothes to dine with him at his club in his hotyouth, and had made them very uncomfortable, and acquired a delightfulreputation himself for advanced ideas; which was a very great thing fora new lord, whose grandfather had been a small shopkeeper, to do. Butsomehow he was a great deal more at his ease with the working men thanwith his former friend and equal, now reduced to a perfectly incredibledestitution of those ordinary circumstances which form the very clothingand skin of most men. Edgar was in soul and being, no doubt, exactly thesame as ever; he had the same face, the same voice, the same thought andfeelings. Had he lost only his money Lord Newmarch would not have feltthe difficulty half so great, for indeed a great many people do(whatever the world may say) lose their money, without being dropped ordiscredited by society. But something a great deal more dreadful hadhappened in Edgar's case. He had lost, so to speak, himself; and how tobehave towards a man who a little while ago had been his equal, nay hissuperior, and now was not his equal, nor anybody's, yet the same man,puzzled the young statesman beyond expression. This is a very differentsort of thing from entertaining a couple of working men to the muchastonishment (delightful homage to one's peculiarities) of one's club.The doctrine that all men are brothers comes in with charming piquancyin the one case, but is very much less easy to deal with in the other.Lord Newmarch got up with some perturbation from his seat when Edgarcame in. He shook him warmly by the hand, and said,"Oh, Arden--ah, Earnshaw," looking at the card. "I beg your pardon. I amdelighted to see you."And then they both sat down and looked at each other after the warmth ofthis accost, and found, as so often happens, that they had nothing moreto say. I do not know a more embarrassing position in ordinarycircumstances, even when there is no additional and complicatingembarrassment. You meet your old friend, you shake hands, you commityourself to an expression of delight--and then you are silent. He hassailed away from you and you from him since you last met, and there isnothing to be said between you, beyond that first unguarded and uncalledfor warmth of salutation, the emblem of an intimacy past. This is howLord Newmarch accosted Edgar; and Edgar accepted the salutation with amomentary glow at his breast. And then they sat down and looked at eachother; they had given forth all the feeling they had toward each other,and how could they express sentiments which had no existence? They hadto glide involuntarily into small talk about the empty state of town,and the new Minister's devotion to business, and the question betweenPrussia and Russia which he had to keep at his post to watch. LordNewmarch allowed, with dignified resignation, that it was hard upon him,and that an Under Secretary of State has much that is disagreeable tobear; and then he added politely, but thinking to himself--oh, how mucheasier were two, nay half-a-dozen working-men, than this!--an inquiry asto the nature of his old friend's occupation. "What," said thestatesman, crossing and uncrossing his legs two or three times insuccession to get the easiest position, and with a look at his shoeswhich expressed eloquently all the many events that had passed sincetheir last meeting, "What are you doing yourself?"CHAPTER X.A Noble Patron.When two men who have met in careless intercourse, without anypossibility of obliging or being obliged, except so far as interchangeof courtesy goes, come suddenly together in relations so changed, theeasy question, "what are you doing?" spoken by the one whose positionhas not altered, to the one who has suffered downfall, has a new worldof significance in it, of tacit encouragement or repulsion of kindly oradverse meaning. It means either "Can I help you?" or, "Don't think ofasking me for help." If the downfallen one has need of aid andpatronage, the faintest inflection of voice thrills him with expectationor disappointment--and even if he is independent, it is hard if he doesnot get a sting of mortification out of the suspected benevolence orabsence of it. Edgar listened to Lord Newmarch's questions, with asudden rising in his mind of many sentiments quite unfamiliar to him. Hewas ashamed--though he had nothing to be ashamed of--angry, though nooffence had been given him--and tingled with excitement for which therewas no reason. How important it had become to him all at once that thisother man, for whom he felt no particular respect, should be favourableto him, and how difficult to reconcile himself to the process of asking,he who had never done anything but give!"I am doing nothing," he said, after a momentary pause, which seemedlong to him, but which Lord Newmarch did not so much as notice, "and totell the truth, I had a great mind to come cap in hand to you, to askfor something. I want occupation--and to speak frankly, a living at thesame time. Not pay without work, but yet pay.""To be sure," said Lord Newmarch; but his countenance fell a little. Anew applicant cannot but appear a natural enemy to every officialpersonage noted for high-mindedness, and a sublime superiority to jobs."I should think something might be found for you--in one department orother. The question is what would you like--or perhaps--what could youdo?""I can do anything a man can usually do, who has never done anything inhis life," said Edgar, trying to laugh. "You know how little that is--agreat deal that is absolutely useless--nothing that is much good.""Yes," said Lord Newmarch, looking much more grave than his applicantdid, whose levity he had always disapproved of. "It is very unfortunatethat what we call the education of a gentleman should be so utterlyunpractical. And, as you are aware, all our clerkships now-a-days aredisposed of by competitive examination. I do not commit myself as to itssatisfactory character as a test of capacity--there are very differentopinions I know on that subject; but the fact is one we must bow to.Probably you would not care at your age to submit to such an ordeal?""I don't care what I submit to," said Edgar, which was totally untrue,for his blood was boiling in the most irrational way, at the thoughtthat this man whom he had laughed at so often, should be a Minister ofState, while he himself was weighing the probabilities of securing aclerkship in the great man's office. Nothing could be more wrong orfoolish, for to be sure Lord Newmarch had worked for his position, andhad his father's wealth and influence behind him; but he had notgenerally impressed upon his acquaintances a very profound respect forhis judgment. "But I don't think I could pass any examination," he addedwith an uneasy laugh."Few men can, without special preparation," said the Under Secretary,whose face grew gradually longer and longer. "Do you know I think thebest thing I can do will be to give you a note to the Home Secretary,who is a very good friend of mine, Lord Millboard. You must have met himI should think--somewhere--in--""Better days," said Edgar, struck by a sudden perception of theludicrous. Yes, that was the phrase--he had seen better days; and hiscompanion felt the appropriateness of it, though he hesitated to employthe word."Yes, indeed; I am sure no one was ever more regretted," said LordNewmarch, spreading before him a sheet of note-paper with a hugeofficial stamp. "I don't think Arden half fills your place. All hisinterest goes to the other side. You hear I suppose sometimes from yoursis--I mean from Mrs. Arden? What kind of post shall I say you wish tohave?""Say out the word you were going to say," said Edgar, "my sister! I havenot seen anyone who knew her for ages. No, I thought it best not to keepup any correspondence. It might have grown a burden to her; but it doesme good to hear you say my sister. How is she looking? Is she happy? Itis so long since I have heard even the name of Clare.""Mrs. Arden is quite well, I believe," said Lord Newmarch doubtfully,not knowing whether "the family" might quite like inquiries to be madefor her by her quondam brother. He felt almost as a man does who iscaught interfering in domestic strife, and felt that Clare's husbandmight possibly take it badly. "She has a couple of babies of course youknow. She looked very well when I saw her last. Happy! yes, I supposeso--as everybody is happy. In the meantime, please, what must I say toLord Millboard? Shall I recall to him your--former position? And whatshall I say you would like to have? He has really a great deal ofpatronage; and can do much more for you if he likes than I.""Tell him I have seen better days," said Edgar with forlorn gaiety, "Ihave met him, but I never ventured to approach so great a potentate.Tell him I am not very particular what kind of work I do, so long as itis something to live by. Tell him--but to be sure, if you introduce meto him I can do all that myself.""That is true," said Lord Newmarch with a little sigh of relief, and hebegan to write his note. When, however, he had got two or three lineswritten in his large hand, he resumed talking, though his pen still ranover the paper. "You have been abroad I heard. Perhaps you can tell mewhat is the feeling in Germany about the proposed unification? I amrather new to my post, and to tell the truth it is not the post I shouldhave chosen; but in the service of the country one cannot always followone's favourite path. 'A gentleman of high breeding and unblemishedcharacter, whose judgment could be relied upon,' that will do, I think.Millboard should find something to suit you if any one can. But toreturn to what we were talking about. I should very much like to haveyour opinion as an impartial observer, of the attitude of Bavaria andthe rest, and how they take Bismarck's scheme?""Does not the principle of competitive examination exist in LordMillboard's department?" said Edgar."Not to the same extent," said Newmarch. "He has always a great deal inhis power. A word from Millboard goes a long way; he has a handofficially or non-officially in a great many things. For instance, Ilike to consult him myself before making an important appointment; heknows everything. He might get you some commissionership or other. Someof them are very good things; a literary man got one just the other day,by Millboard's influence. Did you read for the bar? No? Ah, that's apity. But you might, perhaps, be made an inspector of schools; very highqualifications are not required for such an appointment. By-the-by, nowthat I think of it," he continued, pausing after he had folded hisletter, and looking up, "you were brought up abroad? You can speak allthe modern languages; you don't object to travel. I believe, after all,you are the very man I want."Here he paused, and Edgar waited too, attentive and trying to be amused.As what did the great man want him? As courier for a travelling party?While Lord Newmarch pondered, Edgar, puzzled and not very much delightedwith his position, had hard ado to keep just as quiet and respectful asbecame a man seeking his living. At last the Minister spoke."What I was thinking of," he said, "was the post of Queen's Messenger.You know what that is? It is not badly paid, and the life is amusing. Icannot tell you how important it would be to me to have a man I couldthoroughly trust in such a position. You would be simply invaluable tome; I could rely upon you for telling me how people were really thinkingin foreign capitals. I cannot, of course, in my position, travel aboutas a private person can, and there are a great many things I am mostanxious to get up."Here he paused for some reply; but what could Edgar reply? Lord Newmarchwas not thinking of him, but of his own need of information. Should theapplicant distract the Minister's thoughts back from this greaterchannel to that of his own private case? or should he throw his owncase, as it were, overboard, and give all his sympathy to theUnder-Secretary's elevated needs? The position was comical, but perhapsEdgar was not sufficiently at ease in his mind to see its comic side."You see how important it is," Lord Newmarch said, very gravely, lookingat Edgar for sympathy; "everything depends upon genuineinformation--what the people are thinking, not the on dits that flyabout in diplomatic circles. My dear--eh?--Earnshaw," he cried, withenthusiasm, and a glance at Edgar's card, "I can't tell you how much useyou might be to me."Edgar could not restrain a hasty laugh, which, however, had not muchenjoyment in it. "I am delighted to hear it," he said."Your name shall be put upon the list directly," said Lord Newmarch."One of our men, I know, talks of resigning; and the very first vacancy,I think I may almost say, without further reflection, shall be yours.What are you going to do with yourself for the autumn? I leave town nextweek, I hope, but I shall be back before Christmas; and if you don'thear from me by that time----""Before Christmas!" cried Edgar; he could not prevent his voice fromexpressing a little dismay. What was he to do till Christmas? Live uponhis two ten-pound notes? or break into his precious little capital?or---- The situation appalled him. I suppose he thought, having oncefound something which he could be so very useful in, that it was inNewmarch's power to give him an appointment at once."Of course," said Newmarch, benignantly, "if you are in the country,don't come to town on purpose. Any time in spring would probably do; butif you don't hear from me in a few months, come and see me. When so muchimportant business is passing through one's hands, a little thing--andespecially a personal matter--is apt to slip out of one's head.""To be sure," said Edgar, rising hastily, "and I am taking up, about amere personal matter, your valuable time, which belongs to the nation.""Oh, don't apologise. I am delighted to see you. And you can't think ofhow much use you might be to me," said the great man, earnestly, shakinghands with the small one, impressing upon him, almost with tears in hiseyes, the importance he might come to, "if this man will only be so goodas to resign."Edgar went away with a singing in his ears, which he could scarcelyunderstand at first. In all his kindly careless life there had been solittle occasion for that thrilling of the blood to the brain, in defenceof the Self assailed, which now at once stimulated, and made him dizzy.He scarcely knew what it meant, neither could he realize the bitternessthat came into his heart against his will, a most unusual guest. He wentout from Lord Newmarch's office, and walked long and far before hequite came to himself. Walking has often a similar effect to that whichthe poet tells us rhyme has, "the sad mechanic exercise, like dullnarcotics numbing pain." When he gradually emerged from the haze andheat of this first disagreeable encounter, Edgar took characteristicrefuge in the serio-comic transformation which the whole matterunderwent in Lord Newmarch's hands. Instead of a simple question ofemployment for Edgar Earnshaw, it became the great man's own business, away of informing him as to the points in which his education wasdefective. Finding employment for Edgar interested him moderately; butfinding information for himself, fired his soul;--the comical part ofthe whole being that he expected the other, whose personal interestswere so closely concerned, to feel this superior view of the question asdeeply as he himself did, and to put it quite above the vulgarpreliminary of something to live by. To serve Lord Newmarch, and throughhim the Government, and through the Government the country, was notthat, Edgar asked himself at last, feeling finally able to laugh again,a much more important matter than securing bread and butter for ourthriftless man? As soon as he had laughed he was himself again, and theafter processes of thought were more easy.By-and-by he persuaded himself that on the whole Newmarch had behavedquite naturally, and not unkindly. "As a matter of course," he said tohimself, "every man's own affairs are more interesting to him than anyother man's." It was quite natural that Newmarch should think of hisown business as most important. It was the most important, Edgarcontinued, in his ingenious and peculiar style of reasoning, since itwas the business of the country--whereas Edgar's business was only hisown, and of importance to nobody but himself. Equally, of course, it wasmore important to secure a good public servant, even in the humblecapacity of a Queen's Messenger, than to secure bread and butter forEdgar Earnshaw; and, on the whole, there was a great deal to be said forNewmarch, who was a good fellow, and had been generally friendly, andnot too patronizing. The only wormwood that remained in his thoughts bythe time evening approached, and he turned his steps towards his club insearch of dinner, concerned the long delay which apparently must occurbefore this promised advancement could reach him. Before Christmas;Edgar had very little idea how much a man could live upon in London; buthe did not think it very likely that he could get through two monthsupon twenty pounds. And even if that should be possible, with his littleknowledge and careless habits, what should he do in the meantime? Shouldhe linger about town, doing nothing, waiting for this possibleappointment, which might, perhaps, never come to anything? This was acourse of procedure which prudence and inclination, and so muchexperience as he possessed, alike condemned. Hanging on, waiting tillsomething should turn up! Was this all he was good for? he askedhimself, with a flush on his face. If only the other man would be soobliging as to resign, or to be killed in a railway accident, orswamped in a steamboat, or to take some foreign fever or other, of thewell-known kinds, which haunt those places to which Queen's Messengersare habitually sent! This was a lugubrious prayer, and I don't think theactual Queen's Messenger against whom the anathema was addressed wouldhave been much the worse for Edgar's ill-wishes.These virulent and malignant sentiments helped him to another laugh, andthis was one of the cases in which for a man of his temperament to laughwas salvation. What a good thing it is in all circumstances! and fromhow many troubles, angers and ridiculousnesses this blessed power oflaughter saves us! Man, I suppose, among the fast narrowing list of hisspecialities, still preserves that of being the only animal who laughs.Dogs sometimes sneer; but the genial power of this humorous expressionof one's sense of all life's oddities and puzzles belongs only to man.There were few people about at the club where he dined alone, and thefew acquaintances who recognised him were very shy about his name, notknowing how to address him, and asking each other in corners, as hedivined, what the deuce was his real name, now it had been found outthat he was not Arden? for it must be remembered that he had gone abroadimmediately after his downfall, and had never been known in societyunder his new name, which by this time had become sufficiently familiarto himself. His dinner, poor fellow, was rather a doleful one, andaccompanied by many thoughts. He went to one of the theatresafterwards, where the interregnum between one season and another stilllasted, and foolishness more foolish even than that which is permittedat other periods, reigned riotous. Edgar came away wearied and disgustedbefore the performance was over, and had walked about aimlessly for sometime before he recollected that he had travelled all night, and had aright to be tired--upon which recollection his aimless steps changedtheir character, and he went off briskly and thankfully through thebustling streets under the stars, which were sharp with night frost asthey had been at Loch Arroch. Looking up at them as they glowed andsparkled over the dark house-tops in London, it was natural to thinkwhat was going on at Loch Arroch now. The kye would be "suppered," andBell would have fastened the ever open door, and little Jeanie upstairswould be reading her "chapter" to her grandmother before the old ladywent to bed. He had seen that little, tender, pious scene more thanonce, when Granny was feeble, and he had gone to her room to saygood-night. How sweet the low Scotch voice, with its soft broad vowels,had sounded, reading reverently those sacred verses, better thaninvocation of angels to keep the house from harm! What a peaceful,homely little house! all in it resting tranquil and untroubled beneaththe twinkling stars. He went home to his rooms, through streets wherevery different scenes were going on, hushed by the thought of the ruralcalm and stillness, and half thinking the dark shadows he felt aroundhim must be the dew-breathing shadows of the hills. And when Edgar gotup to his bachelor refuge in Piccadilly, which he called home for thenonce for lack of a better, he did the very wisest thing a tired mancould do, he went to bed; where he slept the moment his head touched thepillow, that sleep which does not always attend the innocent. The morn,as says our homely proverb in Scotland, would bring a new day.CHAPTER XI.Waiting for a Situation.Edgar's calculations, which he began next morning, and carried on for agreat many days after, were of a kind which many men have made beforehim, that it would be foolish to call them original. He made elaboratecalculations upon various pieces of paper, by which he made out thatwith economy, he could perfectly well live upon his twenty pounds fortwo months. To be sure his rent in these rooms in Piccadilly waspreposterously high, and could not by any means be brought within thatcalculation. But then he reflected to himself that moving is alwaysexpensive--(he possessed two portmanteaus, a box of books, and adressing-case, all of which could have gone in a cab)--and that veryprobably he might fall among thieves, and get into the hands of one ofthose proverbial landladies who steal the tea, and drink the brandy, inwhich case it would be no economy at all to save a few shillings onrent. In short, Edgar said to himself, loftily, these petty littlesavings never tell. You are much less comfortable, and it is just asexpensive. For the same reason, he felt it was much the best way tocontinue dining at the club. "It may be sixpence dearer, but it is soinfinitely more comfortable," he said to himself; and, after all,comfort was worth an additional sixpence. By striking off the rent ofhis rooms altogether from the calculation, it seemed to him that hecould afford his dinners at the club; and if he got his appointment byChristmas, as he certainly must, it would be so easy to pay the lodgingsin a lump. He jotted down these calculations so often, and upon so manybits of paper, that he grew to believe in them as if they had been arevelation. By this it will appear that his doubts about hanging on, andwaiting for the possible Queen's Messengership which he had at first setdown as out of the question, did not continue to appear so impracticableas time went on. He said to himself every morning that it was absurd,but still he did nothing else, and gradually the Queen's Messengershipgrew to be a certain thing to him, upon which he was to enter atChristmas, or a little later. After all, what did it matter how he spenta week or two of his time? At eight-and-twenty, life does not appear soshort as some people have found it. A week or two, a month or two, wereneither here nor there.I can scarcely tell how Edgar occupied himself during these wintry days.For one thing, he had not been accustomed to regular occupation, and thedesultory life was familiar to him. The days glided past he scarcelyknew how. He did a great many perfectly virtuous and laudable actions.He went to the British Museum, and to all the collections of pictures;he even, in sheer absence of anything else to do, went to the CharityHouse, which was a little way out of London, and was taken over it bySister Susan, his travelling companion, and for an hour or so was seizedupon by the charity fever, which is very contagious, and for some dayskept thinking, as he went about the streets, of all the miserablesouls--not to say bodies--consuming there, in dirt, and disease, andignorance. I do not mean to give any account of the Charity-House--atleast, not here and at this moment. But Sister Susan undeniablyexercised a powerful attraction over the young man, as she discoursed inher cheery voice of her orphans, and her patients, and her penitents,all of which classes were collected round and in "the House." She wasnot "the Mother," who was rather a great personage, but she was one ofthe elders in the Sisterhood, and her conventual talk was very amusingto Edgar, who was not used to it. He did all he could to make her talkof the journey in which they had been fellow-travellers, and of heryoung companion; and Sister Susan was cunningly open in certainparticulars:Yes, she had been in Scotland, in the North, where it was thought thingswere ripening for a great work, and where it had been suggested aSisterhood might be of use in helping to restore a benighted people toChristian unity in the bosom of the afflicted Church of Scotland, theonly real representative of Apostolic Christianity among thePresbyterians, who usurp even that faithful remnant's name. But it didnot carry out their expectations, Sister Susan allowed. ThePresbyterians were very obstinate and bigoted. Poor creatures, theypreferred their own way, though it could lead to nothing but darkness;and the idea had to be resigned."Was your companion with you on your mission? Miss ---- I forget what yousaid was her name," said deceitful Edgar.Sister Susan shook her head."She has not sufficient experience for that," she said, decidedly. "No,no, no. We must not employ new beginners in such delicate work. She wason a visit, and was anxious to get home. I took charge of her at Lady--Imean at the request of a relation of hers; and I made her do a littlebit of self-denial, as you saw," said Sister Susan, laughing, "which isan excellent thing always--not very comfortable for the body, perhaps,but excellent for the soul.""Do you think so?" said Edgar, whose present experience was not much inthat way, whose givings up had hitherto cost him little, and who hadbegun to suspect that, notwithstanding all that had happened to him, andall that he had bestowed upon others, he had not even begun yet to findout what self-denial meant."Not a doubt of it," said Sister Susan. She was so sure of everythingthat it was a pleasure to see her nod her confident little head, andcross her hands. "She laughs about it now, and makes a great joke;though, after all, she says it was a cheat, and the third class wasquite as good as the first--no originals in it, nor genuine poorpeople--only you.""Did she know me?"The question burst from him in spite of himself, and it had a somewhatuncomfortable effect on Sister Susan."Know you?" she said. "What--what--a curious question, Mr. Earnshaw!Now, how could she know you? You never saw her before.""I suppose not," said Edgar, doubtfully."Why, you know you never did," said Sister Susan, with her usualconfident tone, and indeed Edgar felt that she must be right. "You tookher for a Sister," she added, with a merry laugh."How should I know the difference?" asked piteously the young man."Why, she had not this, nor this, nor this," said the Sister,triumphantly touching one part of her dress after another. "She had on asimple black dress, and cloak, and veil--that was all. A good littlegirl," she continued, "our orphans are all fond of her, and she is verynice to those young sisters of hers, who are much more taken outnow-a-days than she is, and carry everything before them--especiallysince she went off so much, poor dear.""Has she gone off?" Edgar asked, more and more interested, he couldscarcely tell why."Oh, dreadfully; lost her pretty colour, and her hair used to come outin handfuls; she has been obliged to have it cut off to save it. She isnot like what she was, poor thing; but I hope," added Sister Susandevoutly, "that thinking so much more seriously than she used to do,the change will be of great benefit to her soul.""Poor Miss--! You have not told me her name," said Edgar."Haven't I?" said Sister Susan. "Dear, dear, there is the bell forchapel, and I can't stay with you any longer. There are a few benchesnear the door where strangers are allowed to go, if you wish to stay forevensong."Edgar stayed, chiefly, I fear, out of mere listlessness, and took hisplace in the corner by the door allotted to Philistines of the malegender, with much submission and docility. The little chapel was veryrichly decorated, the light intercepted by small painted windows, thewalls one mass of mural ornament. He compared it in his imagination,with a smile, to the bare little convent chapels he had seen and heardof in countries where the institution appeared more natural. Here therewas a profusion of ecclesiastical luxury, an absolute parade ofdecoration. It struck him with a double sense of incongruity, but therewas no one to whom he could express this evil sentiment: Sister Susandid not appear again as he had hoped, and he wended his way back to townwith some additional information, which he had not possessed when heleft. Why should he be so curious about Miss ----, the nameless one? Hehad thought her another Sister, and entertained no profuse curiosity inrespect to her at first; but now it seemed to him that only a littlemore light might make her visible to him. There was no reason why heshould find her out, or why he should wish to do so; but great is theperversity of human nature--perhaps this was the special reason why thethought occupied him so much.It was very strange to so friendly a soul to have no friends whom hecould go to, whom he could talk to, no friendly house where the doorwould open to him, and faces smile at his sight. It is true that forthree years he had been severed, to a great degree, from domesticpleasures, which do not thrive at foreign centres of cosmopolitanresort--but yet he had never been without a large circle ofacquaintances, and had occasionally seen the old friends of his boyhoodhere and there; but in London, in October and November, whom could heexpect to see? The stray man who dropped in now and then at the club,was on the wing between two country houses, or was going to join a partysomewhere, or home to his people. Some men, of course, must live inLondon, but these men, I presume, did not go much to their club, or elsethey were so little among the number of Edgar's friends that they didnot count. Now and then one would join him at dinner, or in one of thelong walks he took, and he made a friend or two at the Museum, among thebooks and prints. But he was like an Australian emigrant, or other exilein savage places. These were all men, and he never saw the face of awoman except in the streets or shops, unless it was his landlady, whodid not interest him.How strangely different from the old days, in which so many fair womenwould smile and listen to the young man who was at once so rich and sooriginal, a great landed proprietor, with the opinions of arevolutionary. It was not his downfall, however, which had made all thedifference, which was a comfort to him; for, indeed, the families whomhe had once visited were out of London. Sometimes it occurred to himthat if the Thornleighs had been in town, he would have gone to them andasked leave to be admitted just once or twice, for pure charity, and hehad walked several times past their house in Berkeley Square, and gazedat its closed shutters with half a notion of calling on the housekeeper,at least, and asking to see the place in which he had spent so manypleasant hours. He used to live all over again his first visit toLondon, with an amused pleasure in recalling all his own puzzles anddifficulties. He seemed to himself to have been a boy then, almost achild, playing with fate and his life, and understanding nothing of allthat was around him. To have ten thousand a year one time, and no incomeat all the next, but only a hundred pounds in the bank "to fall backupon," and the vague promise of a post as Queen's Messenger atChristmas--what a change it was! Though to be sure, even now, Edgar saidto himself, there were more people in London worse off than he, thanthere were people who were better off. A hundred pounds in the bank is,in reality, a fortune--as long as you can keep it there; and a man whohas the post of Queen's Messenger is independent, which is as much asany prince can be.All these philosophisings were wonderfully true, but they did not takeaway the uncomfortable, desolate, profitless sensation of living alonein London without friends, doing nothing except live, which, when youlive for the mere sake of living, and because you can't help it, is,perhaps, the dreariest occupation on earth. And in November--when Londonis at its worst, and the year at its worst, when the gloomy daylight isshort, and the weary nights are long, and when everything that bears theguise of amusement palls upon the man who has nothing to do but amusehimself.Sometimes Edgar, in momentary desperation, thought of rushing off to hisformer haunts abroad, sometimes of turning back to Loch Arroch, helpingin whatever might be doing, getting some share in human life, and someplace among his fellows; but then the remembrance would strike him that,now-a-days, he could not do what he pleased, that he had no money butthat hundred pounds in the bank, and no way of getting any now till theappointment came.By-and-by, however, his opinion began to change about the hundred poundsin the bank. It changed by slow degrees after he had changed his secondten-pound note, and saw those last precious sovereigns slipping out ofhis grasp, which they did with a strange noiseless celerityinconceivable to him. How did they go? When he counted up all he hadspent, every sixpence seemed so modest, so natural! and yet they weregone, he knew not how; vanished even, he thought, while he was lookingat them. Then the thought arose in his mind, why keep a hundred poundsin the bank? It was a waste of capital, money which brought in noreturn; and for that matter, if it was merely to secure something to"fall back upon," fifty pounds were just as good as a hundred. Theincome of a Queen's Messenger was good, he said to himself (he had not,in reality, the least idea what it was!), and when he got hisappointment it would be very easy to put back the other fifty pounds ifhe found it expedient. But the more he thought of it the less he saw anyneed for keeping so much money lying useless. He never could get anyincome from so small a sum, and the fifty pounds was quite enough forany sudden emergency. Or supposing, he said, seventy-five? Seventy-fivepounds was magnificent as a fund to fall back upon; and it was with afeeling that twenty-five pounds had been somehow added, not taken fromhis capital, that he went to the bank one day in December and drew outthe quarter, not the half, of his little stock of money. Withtwenty-five pounds in his pocket and seventy-five in the bank, he feltmuch richer than with the poor little undivided hundred. And somehowevery day as he grew poorer, he became more convinced that it would bethe most short-sighted economy to remove from his Piccadilly lodgings,or to relinquish his dinners at the club. Why, they were cheap,absolutely cheap, both the one and the other, in comparison with thenasty meals and wretched lodgings for which, no doubt, he might pay alittle less money. He even became slightly extravagant and disposed tobuy little knick-knacks, and to consume little delicacies as his meansgrew smaller and smaller.I cannot tell what produced this curious state of feeling in Edgar'smind. There is a kind of giddiness and desperation of poverty whichseizes a man when he is in the act of spending his last parcel of coin.It must all go so soon that it seems worse than useless to mnager thelittle remnant, and a kind of vertige, a rage to get it all over,comes upon the mind. Perhaps it is the same feeling which makes men in asinking ship leap wildly into the water to meet their fate instead ofwaiting for it; and as time went on the impulse grew stronger andstronger. The seventy-five pounds of capital seemed magnificent inDecember; but after Christmas it seemed to Edgar that even his fiftypounds was too much to be lying useless; and he had a little bottle ofchampagne with his dinner, and resolved that, as soon as the bank wasopen, he would draw, say ten pounds. After all, what was the use ofbeing so particular about "something to fall back upon?" Probably hewould never want it. If he fell ill, being a Queen's Messenger, it wasmuch more likely that he should fall ill in Berlin or Vienna, or Rome orNaples, than at home--and then it would be some one's duty to mind himand take care of him. And if it should be his fate to die, there wouldbe an end of the matter. Why should he save even forty pounds?--he hadno heir.Poor Edgar! it was a kind of intoxication that had seized him, anintoxication caused by idleness, loneliness, and the separation of hislife from that of every one else around him. Somehow, though Christmascame and passed and he heard nothing, he could not pluck up courage togo to Downing Street again. Of course the appointment would come someday, most likely to-morrow. He was not going to worry Newmarch to deathby going to him every day. He could wait till to-morrow. And so thingswent on till it ran very hard with the solitary young man. It occurredto him one day that his clothes were getting shabby. To be sure he hadunlimited credit with his tailor, having just paid a large bill withoutinquiry or question; but the fact of feeling yourself shabby when youhave very little money is painful and startling, and gives theimagination a shock. After this his mind lost the strange ease which ithad possessed up to this moment, and he grew troubled and restless. "Imust go to Newmarch again," he acknowledged at last to himself, and allat once wondered with a sudden pang whether his Messengership was ascertain as he had hoped. "I must go to Newmarch to-morrow," he said overand over again as, somewhat dazed and giddy with this sudden thought, hewent along the pavement thoughtfully towards the club, which had becomea second home to him. It was the end of January by this time, and a fewmore people were beginning to appear again in these regions. He went into his dinner, saying the words to himself mechanically and half aloud.CHAPTER XII.Disappointment.It is very curious how often the unintentional movements of other menconcur in making a crisis in an individual life. When Edgar went to hisclub that evening he knew no reason why anything unusual should happento him. His mind had been roused by sudden anxiety, that anxiety which,seizing a man all at once upon one particular point, throws a veil overeverything by so doing, and showed yellowness or blackness into thecommon light; but he had no reason to suspect that any new light wouldcome to him, or any new interest into his life, when he went dully andwith a headache to his habitual seat at his habitual table and ate hisdinner, which was not of a very elaborate character. There were more menthan usual in the club that evening, and when Edgar had finished hisdinner he went into the library, not feeling disposed for the long walkthrough the lighted streets with which he so often ended his evening. Hetook a book, but he was not in the mood to read. Several men nodded tohim as they came and went; one, newly arrived, who had not seen himsince his downfall, came up eagerly and talked for ten minutes before hewent out. The man was nobody in particular, yet his friendliness wasconsolatory, and restored to Edgar some confidence in his own identity,which had seemed to be dropping from him. He put up his book before himwhen he was left again alone, and behind this shield looked at hiscompanions, of whom he knew nothing or next to nothing.One of the people whom he thus unconsciously watched was a man whom hehad already noted on several evenings lately, and as to whose conditionhe was in some perplexity. The first evening Edgar had half stumbledover him with the idea that he was one of the servants, and in theglance of identification with which he begged pardon, decided that,though not one of the servants, he must be a shopkeeper, perhaps welloff and retired, whom somebody had introduced, or who had been admittedby one of those chances which permit the rich to enter everywhere. Nextevening when he saw the same man again, he rubbed out as it were withhis finger the word shopkeeper, which he had, so to speak, writtenacross him, and wrote "city-man" instead. A city-man may be anything; hemay be what penny-a-liners call a merchant prince, without losing thecharacteristic features of his class. This man was about forty-five, hehad a long face, with good but commonplace features, hair getting scantyon the top, and brown whiskers growing long into two points, after thefashion of the day. The first time he was in evening dress, having comein after dinner, which was the reason why Edgar took him for one of theattendants. The next time he was in less elaborate costume, and lookedbetter; for evening dress is trying to a man who has not the air noblewhich christianizes those hideous garments. The third night again,Edgar, in imagination, drew a pen through the word "city-man," andwondered whether the stranger could be a successful artist, a greatportrait-painter, something of that description, a prosperous man towhom art had become the most facile and most lucrative of trades. Onthis particular night he again changed his opinion, crossed the wordartist and put man about town, indefinitest of designations, yetinfinitely separated from all the others. Thus blurred and overwrittenby so many attempts at definition, the new-comer attracted hisattention, he could scarcely tell why. There was nothing remarkableabout the man; he had grey eyes, a nose without much character, looselips disposed to talk, an amiable sort of commonness, eagerness,universal curiosity in his aspect. He knew most people in the room, andwent and talked to them, to each a little; he looked at all the paperswithout choice of politics; he took down a great many books, looked atthem and put them back again. Edgar grew a little interested in him onthis special evening. He had a long conversation with one of theservants, and talked to him sympathetically, almost anxiously, ending bygiving him an address, which the man received with great appearance ofgratitude. Might he be a physician perhaps? But his bearing and hislooks were alike against this hypothesis. "Benevolent," Edgar said tohimself.His attention, however, was quite drawn away from this stranger by thesudden entrance of Lord Newmarch, who like himself was a member of theclub, and who came in hurriedly, accompanied by some one less dignifiedbut more eager than himself, with whom he was discussing some subjectwhich required frequent reference to books. Edgar felt his heart stir ashe perceived the great man enter. Was it possible that his fatedepended, absolutely depended, upon the pleasure of this man--that twowords from him might make his fortune secure, or plunge him into adeeper and sickening uncertainty which could mean only ruin? Goodheaven, was it possible? A kind of inertness, moral cowardice, he didnot know what to call it--perhaps the shrinking a doomed man feels fromactual hearing of his fate--had kept him from going to the office to putthe arbiter of his destinies in mind of his promise. Now he could notlet this opportunity slip; he must go to him, he must ask him what wasto be the result. Up to this morning he had felt himself sure of hispost, now he felt just as sure of rejection. Both impressions no doubtwere equally unreasonable; but who can defend himself against suchimpressions? Gradually Edgar grew breathless as he watched thatdiscussion which looked as if it would never end. What could it beabout? Some vague philanthropico-political question, some bit ofdoctrinarianism of importance to nobody--while his was a matter of deathand life. To be sure this was his own fault, for he might, as you willperceive, dear reader, have gone to Lord Newmarch any day, and foundhim at his office, where probably, amid all the sublime business there,Edgar's affairs had gone entirely out of his head. But if you think thesuggestion that it was his own fault made the suspense now astraw-weight more easy to him, this is a point on which I do not agreewith you. The consequences of our own faults are in all circumstancesthe most difficult to bear.Oddly enough, the stranger whom Edgar had been watching, seemed anxiousto speak to Lord Newmarch too. Edgar's eyes met his in their mutualwatch upon the Minister, who went on disputing with his companion,referring to book after book. It was some military question of which Isuppose Lord Newmarch knew as much as his grandmother did, and the otherwas a hapless soldier endeavouring in vain to convey a lucid descriptionand understanding of some important technical matter to the head of theSecretary of State. In vain; Lord Newmarch did not try to understand--heexplained; to many people this method of treating information is so muchthe most natural. And the stranger watched him on one side, and Edgar onthe other. Their eyes met more than once, and after a while the humourof the situation struck Edgar, even in his trouble, and he smiled; uponwhich a great revolution made itself apparent in the other'scountenance. He smiled too; not with the sense of humour which movedEdgar, but with a gleam of kindness in his face, which threw a certainbeauty over it. Edgar was struck with a strange surprise: he was takenaback at the same time, he felt as if somehow he must have appealed tothe kindness, the almost pity in the other's face. What had he done tocall forth such an expression? His newborn pride jumped up in arms; andyet there was no possibility of offence meant, and nothing to warrantoffence being taken. Edgar, however, averted his eyes hastily, andwatched Lord Newmarch no more. And then he took himself to task, andasked himself, Was it an offence to look at him kindly? Was he offendedby a friendly glance? Good heavens! what was he coming to, if it was so.Presently Edgar's heart beat still higher, for Lord Newmarch's companionrose to go, and he, having caught sight of the stranger, remained, andwent up to him holding out his hand. Edgar could but wait on, and bidehis time; his book was still before him, at which he had never looked. Asickening sense of humiliation crept over him. He felt all the misery ofdependence; here was he, so lately this man's equal, waiting, sickeningfor a word from him, for a look, wondering what he would say,questioning with himself, while his heart beat higher and higher, andthe breath came quickly on his lips. Good heavens, wondering whatNewmarch would say! a man whom he had so laughed at, made fun of, butwho was now to be the very arbiter of his fate, whose word would makeall the difference between a secure and useful and worthy future, andthat impoverishment of hope, and means, and capability altogether, whichsome call ruin--and justly call.While Edgar sat thus waiting, excitement gradually gaming upon him, hesaw with some surprise that the man to whom he had given so manydifferent descriptions, was drawing back and pushing Lord Newmarchtowards him; and seeing this, he got up, with a half-shrinking from hisfate, half-eagerness to hear it."All right," said the unknown, "your turn first. The great man must giveus all audience in turn;" and with a little nod he went to the other endof the room and took up a newspaper, of which he probably made as littleuse as Edgar had been doing of his book."Droll fellow!" said Newmarch, "how d'ye do, eh, Earnshaw? I have beenin town this month past, but you have never looked me up.""I feared to bore you," said Edgar, hastily."It is my business never to be bored," said Lord Newmarch, with acertain solemnity, which was natural to him. "Where have you been--inthe country? what here all this time! I wish I had known; I seldom comehere, except for the library, which is wonderfully good, as perhaps youknow. That was Cheeseman that was arguing with me--Cheeseman, you know,one of those practical people--and insists upon his own way.""I wonder," said Edgar, uneasily, "whether you have ever thought againof a small matter I went to you about?""What, the messengership?" said Lord Newmarch, "what do you take mefor--eh, Earnshaw? Of course I have thought of it; there is never aweek that I do not hope something may happen to old Runtherout; I don'tmean anything fatal of course; but there he sticks from month to month,and probably so he will from year to year."Edgar felt his countenance falling, falling. He felt, or thought hefelt, his jaw drop. He felt his heart go down, down, like a stone. Heput a miserable smile upon his miserable face. "Then I suppose there isno chance for me," he said."Oh yes, my dear fellow, certainly there is a chance--as much chance asthere ever was," said Lord Newmarch, cheerfully, "these things, ofcourse, cannot be altered all at once, but as soon as old Runtheroutgives up, which cannot be long--I do not mind for my part what anyonesays, I shall put you in. If you only knew what it would have been to meto have you in Berlin now! You speak German quite fluently, don't you?Good heavens, what a loss to me!"And, good heavens what a loss to me! Edgar felt disposed to say. As muchchance as there ever was! then what had the chance been at first, forwhich he had wasted so much time and all his little stock of money. Godhelp him! he had to receive the news with a smile, the best he couldmuster, and to listen to Lord Newmarch's assurance that a few monthscould make very little difference. "Oh, very little difference!" echoedpoor Edgar, with that curious fictitious brassy (why he thought it wasbrassy I cannot tell, but that was the adjective he used to himself)brassy imitation of a smile; and Lord Newmarch went on talking somehowup in the air beside him, about a number of things, to which he saidyes and no mechanically with some certain kind of appropriateness, Isuppose, for nobody seemed to find out the semi-consciousness in whichhe was--until the great man suddenly recollected that he must speak afew words to Tottenham, and fell back upon the man with worn grey eyesand loose lips, who sprang up from behind his newspaper like a jack in abox. Edgar, for his part, dropped down in his chair something like thesame toy when shut up in its hiding-place. There was a buzzing in hisears again as there had been when he had his first interview with theMinister--but this time the giddiness was more overpowering; a hundredthoughts passed through his mind in a moment, each crowding upon each, anoiseless, breathless crowd. What was he to do? Everything seemed to beshown to him in the space of a moment, as fable says, a whole lifetimeis shown in a moment to those who die suddenly. Good God! a few months!what was he to do?Some people can face the prospect of living for a few months on nothingquite pleasantly, and some people do it habitually (without being at allbad people), and get through somehow, and come to no tragical end. ButEdgar was young and unaccustomed to poverty. He was even unaccustomed tolive from hand to mouth, as so many of us do, light-hearted wretches,without taking thought for the morrow. It was some time, it was true,before he was roused to think of the morrow at all, but, when he did, itseized upon him like a vulture. He sank back into his chair, and satthere like a log, with vacant eyes, but mind preternaturally busy andoccupied. What was he to do?He was roused from this outward stupor, but inner ferment, by seeingNewmarch again come up accompanied by the stranger, whose very existencehe had forgotten. "Mr. Tottenham, Mr. Edgar Earnshaw," said theUnder-Secretary, "one of my best friends. Come and see me, won't you, inEaton Place. I must go now; and come to the office soon, and let us talkyour affair over. The moment old Runtherout will consent to take himselfout of the way--As for you, Tottenham, I envy you. All your schemes inyour own hands, no chief to thwart you, no office to keep onrecommending this man and that, when they know you have a man of yourown. You may thank heaven that you have only your own theories to serve,and not Her Majesty. Good night, good night.""Good night," said Edgar, absently.Mr. Tottenham said nothing, but he gave Lord Newmarch a finger to shake,and turned to his new companion, who sat with his head down, and paidlittle attention to his presence. He fixed his eyes very closely onEdgar, which is a thing that can scarcely be done without attractingfinally the notice of the person looked at. When he had caught Edgar'swondering but dazed and dreamy look, he smiled--the same smile by whichEdgar had already been half pleased, half angered."Mr. Earnshaw," he said, "you have a story, and I know it. I hope Ishould have tried to behave as well myself; but I don't know. And Ihave a story too. Will you come into the smoking-room if you havenothing better to do, and I'll tell it you? I call it the history of avery hard case. Newmarch left you to me as his substitute, for he knew Iwanted to talk. I like the exchange. He's a profound blockhead, thoughhe's Secretary of State. Come and smoke a cigar."Edgar rose mechanically, he scarcely knew why; he was pale; he felt hislegs almost give way under him as he moved across the passage to thesmoking-room. He did not want to smoke, nor to know Mr. Tottenham'sstory; but he had not strength of mind to resist what was asked of him."A few months," he kept saying to himself. It seemed to him that asudden indifference to everything else, to all things greater and moredistant, had come into his mind. For the first time in his life he wasself-engrossed, self-absorbed, able to think of nothing but his ownnecessities, and what he was to do. So strange was this to Edgar, somiserable did he feel it, that even on the short journey from one roomto another he made an effort to shake off the sudden chains with whichthis sudden necessity had bound him, and was appalled by his ownweakness, almost by a sense of guilt, when he found that he could takeno interest whatever in Mr. Tottenham, that he could think of nothingbut himself. For the first time, there was nobody but himself involved;no justice to be done, no kindness to be shown to others. Wherever otherpeople are concerned, a certain breadth, a certain freedom andlargeness, come into the question, even though the other people may bepoor and small enough; but how mean the generous man feels, how pettyand miserable, when he, and he only, becomes by any twist of fortune thecentre of all his thoughts!CHAPTER XIII.A new Friend."I hope I should have done exactly as you did in that Arden business,"said Mr. Tottenham; "but I can't tell. The amount of meanness andfalseness to all one's own rules which one feels in one's self in agreat emergency is wonderful. I never put any dependence on myself. NowI will tell who, or rather what I am. The pronoun Who is inappropriatein my case. I am nobody; but when you know what I am--if, indeed, myname does not tell you--""No," said Edgar, forcing himself into attention."It is not a bad name; there are fine people, I believe, who bear it,and who hold up their heads with the best. But if you belonged to amiddle-class London family, and had a mother and sisters, you would haveno difficulty in identifying me. I am not a Tottenham with a Christianname like other people. I am Tottenham's, in the possessive case.""I begin to understand," said Edgar.What an effort it was to him! But he grew more capable of making theeffort as he tried to make it, and actually looked up now with a gleamof intelligence in his eye."You begin to realize me," said his companion. "I am Tottenham's. I havebeen Tottenham's all my life. My father died when I was only a smallboy. I hope, though I don't know, that he might have had sense enough tohabituate me to my fate from the beginning, which would have made itmuch easier. But my mother, unfortunately, was a lady, or thoughtherself so. She brought me up as if there was not such a thing as a shopin the world. She buys everything at Howell and James's of set purposeand malice prepense, when she could get all she wants at cost price inour own place; to be sure she can afford it, thanks to the shop. I neverknew anything about this said shop till I was at Eton, when I denied theconnection stoutly, and fought for it, and came off triumphant, thoughthe other fellow was the biggest. When I went home for the holidays, Itold the story. 'You were quite right not to give in to it, my dear,'said my mother. 'But is it true?' said I. Poor dear, how sheprevaricated! She would not have told a lie for the world, but a tinylittle bit of a fib did not seem so bad. Accordingly I found it out, andhad to go back to Eton, and beg the fellow's pardon, and tell him itwasn't a lie he told, but the truth, only I had not known it. I don'tthink any of them thought the worse of me for that.""I should think not," cried Edgar, beginning to rouse up."No, I don't suppose they did; but from that day I became thin-skinned,as people call it, and scented the shop afar off in everything peoplesaid. My mother's contempt for it, and shame of it, got deep into mymind. I grew sensitive. I did not like to give my name when I wentanywhere. I felt sure some one would say, 'Oh, Tottenham's!' when mycard was taken in. I can't tell you the misery this gave me all throughschool and college. I hated the shop, and was afraid of it. I wasmorbidly ashamed of my name. I went and wandered about in vacation,wearing other men's names as I might have borrowed their coats. Notwithout their consent, mind you," he added, sharply. "I did nothingdishonourable; but I had a horror of being Tottenham, a horror which Icannot describe.""That was strange!""You think so? Well, so do I now; and it was very unfortunate for me.It got me into many scrapes; it almost cost me my wife. You don't knowmy wife? I must take you out to see her. I was introduced to her undersomebody else's name--not a very distinguished name, it is true, Smith,or Brown, or something, and under that name she accepted me; but when Itold her how things really were, her countenance flamed like that of theangel, do you remember? in Milton, when Adam says something caddish--Iforget what exactly. How she did look at me! 'Ashamed of your name!' shesaid, 'and yet ask me to share it!' There is pride and pride," saidMr. Tottenham to himself with musing admiration. "The poor dear motherthought she was proud; Mary is so; that makes all the difference. Igot into such trouble as I never was in all my life. She sent me rightaway; she would have nothing to say to me; she cast me off as you mightcast away that cinder with that pair of tongs. For a time I was the mostmiserable fellow on the face of the earth. I wandered about the placewhere she lived night and day; but even then, if you will believe me, itcost me a very hard struggle indeed to get to the shop. When I wasdesperate, I did.""Why is he telling me all this, I wonder?" said Edgar to himself; buthe was interested, he could not tell how, and had raised his head, andfor the moment shaken off something of the burden from his own back."I made up my mind to it, and went at last," said this odd man, puffingat his cigar with a vehemence that made it evident he felt it still. "Ifound that nobody wanted me there; that everybody preferred not to beinterfered with; that the managers had fallen each into his own way, andhad no desire for me to meddle. But I am not the sort of man that canstand and look on with his hands in his pockets. You will wonder, andperhaps you will despise me, when I tell you that I found Tottenham's onthe whole a very interesting place.""I neither wonder nor despise," said Edgar. "What did you do?""What didn't I do?" said Mr. Tottenham, with rueful humour. "I did allthe mischief possible. I turned the whole place upside down. Idiminished the profits for that year by a third part. I changed thewell-known good order of Tottenham's into confusion worse confounded.The old managers resigned in a body. By-the-way, they stayed on all butone afterwards, when I asked them. As for the assistants, there wascivil war in the place, and more than one free fight between thedifferent sides; for some sided with me, perhaps because they approvedof me, perhaps because I was the master, and could do what I liked; butthe end was that I stayed there three months, worked there, and thenwrote to Mary; and she took me back.""I am very glad to hear it," said Edgar; and he smiled and sighed withnatural sympathy.He had become quite interested in the story by this time, and totallyforgotten all about his own miseries. He came out of his cloud finallyjust at this point, and took, at last, the cigar which his new friendhad from time to time offered him."Ah! come now, this is comfortable," said Tottenham. "Up to that momentmine had been a very hard case, don't you think so? I don't pretend tohave anything more to grumble about. But, having had a hard case myself,I sympathize with other people. Yours was a horribly hard case. Tell menow, that other fellow, that Arden scamp! I know him--as proud asLucifer, and as wicked as all the rest of the evil spirits puttogether--do you mean to say he allowed you to go away, and give him upall that fine property, and save him thousands of pounds in a lawsuit,without making some provision for you? Such a thing was never heard of.""No," said Edgar; "don't be unjust to him. It was a bitter pill for meto take a penny from him; but I did, because they made me.""And you've spent it all!"Edgar laughed; he could not help it. His elastic nature had mounted upagain; he began to feel sure that he could not be ruined so completelyafter all; he must be able to do something. He looked up at hisquestioner with eyes full of humour. Mr. Tottenham, who was standing infront as grave as a judge, looked at him, and did not laugh."I don't see the fun," he said. "You shouldn't have done it. You havelet yourself drop half out of recollection before you asked foranything, whereas you should have got provided for at once. Hang it all!I suppose there are some places yet where a man in office may place afriend--and some opportunities left to put a good man in by means of ajob, instead of putting in a bad man by competition, or seniority, orsome other humbug. You should have done that at first.""Possibly," said Edgar, who had been amused, not by the idea of havingspent all his money, but by that of making a clean breast to this man,whom he had never spoken to before, of the most private particulars ofhis life.Mr. Tottenham made a few turns about the room, where there was for themoment nobody but themselves. He said then suddenly,"I take an interest in you. I should like to help you if I could.Tottenham's is no end of a good property, and I can do what I like----""I am sure I am very much obliged," said Edgar, laughing. "I shouldthank you still more warmly if it were not so funny. Why should you takean interest in me?""It is odd, perhaps," said the other; but he did not laugh. A smile ranover his face, that was all, and passed again like a momentary light.Then he added, "It is not so odd as you think. If I could conceal fromyou who my wife was, I might be tempted to do so; but I can't, forthough I'm only Tottenham's, she's in the peerage. My Mary is sister toAugusta Thornleigh, who--well, who knew you, my dear fellow. Lookhere! She's fashionable and all that; she would not let you see herdaughters, at present, if she could help it; but she's a good woman,mind. I have heard her tell your story. If ever there was a hard case,that was one; and when I heard of it, I resolved, if I ever had thechance, to stand by you. You behaved like a gentleman. Since we havebeen made acquainted, Earnshaw, we have not shaken hands yet!"They did it now very heartily; and in those restless grey eyes, whichwere worn by sheer use and perpetual motion, there glimmered somemoisture. Edgar's eyes were dry, but his whole heart was melted. Therewas a pause for a minute or more, and the ashes fell softly on thehearth, and the clock ticked on the mantel-piece. Then Edgar asked, "Howare they all?" with that sound in his utterance which the French intheir delicate discrimination call tears in the voice."Quite well, quite well!" said Tottenham hurriedly; and then he added,"We didn't come here to speak of them. Earnshaw, I want you to come tomy house.""It is very kind of you," said Edgar. "I think I have seen Lady Mary.She is very sweet and lively, like--some one else; with fair hair----""Isn't she?" cried Lady Mary's admiring husband; and his eyes glowedagain. "I want you to come and stay with us while this business withNewmarch gets settled.""Why?" said Edgar, with genuine surprise; and then he added, "You are agreat deal too good. I should like to go for a day or two. I haven'tspoken to a lady for months.""Poor fellow!" said Mr. Tottenham, taking no notice of the "Why?" "Welive only a little way out of town, on account of the shop. I have neverneglected the shop since the time I told you about. She would not let mefor that matter. Nobody, you see, can snub her, in consequence of herrank; and partly for her sake, partly because I'm rich, I suppose,nobody tries to snub me. There are many of my plans in which you couldhelp me very much--for a time, you know, till Newmarch comes off.""You are very kind," said Edgar; but his attention wandered after this,and other thoughts came into his mind, thoughts of himself and hisforlorn condition, and of the profound uncertainty into which he and allhis ways had been plunged. He scarcely paid any attention to thearrangements Mr. Tottenham immediately made, though he remembered thathe promised to go out with him next day to Tottenham's, as his house wascalled. "The same as the shop," he said, with a twinkle in the corner ofhis grey eye. Edgar consented to these arrangements passively; but hispatience was worn out, and he was very anxious to get away.And so this strange evening came to an end, and the morning after it.The new day arose, a smoky, foggy, wintry morning, through which so manypeople went to work; but not Edgar. He looked out upon the world fromhis window with a failing heart. Even from Kensington and Brompton,though these are not mercantile suburbs, crowds of men were joltingalong on all the omnibuses, crowds pouring down on either side of thestreet--to work. The shop people went along the road getting anddelivering orders; the maid-servants bustled about the doors in thefoggy, uncertain light; the omnibuses rushed on, on, in a continuousstream; and everybody was busy. Those who had no work to do, pretendedat least to be busy too; the idlers had not come out yet, had notstirred, and the active portion of the world were having everythingtheir own way. Edgar had revived from his depression, but he had notregained his insouciance and trust in the future. On the contrary, hewas full of the heaviest uncertainty and care. He could not wait longerfor this appointment, which might keep him hanging on half his life,which was just as near now as when he began to calculate on having it"about Christmas;" probably the next Christmas would see it just asuncertain still. He must, he felt, attempt something else, and changehis tactics altogether. He must leave his expensive lodgings at once;but alas! he had a big bill for them, which he had meant to pay off hisfirst quarter's salary. He had meant to pay it the moment that blessedmoney for which he should have worked came; and now there was noappearance, no hope of it ever coming--at least, only as much hope asthere had always been, no more.Poor Edgar! he might have rushed out of doors and taken to the firstmanual work he could find as his heart bade him; but to go and solicitsomebody once more, and hang on and wait, dependent upon therecollection or the caprice of some one or other who could giveemployment, but might, out of mere wantonness, withhold it--this washarder than any kind of work. He could dig, he felt, and would digwillingly, or do any other thing that was hard and simple andstraightforward; but to beg for means of working he was ashamed; andthere seemed something so miserable, so full of the spirit of dependencein having to wait on day by day doing nothing, waiting till somethingmight fall into his hands. How infinitely better off working men were,he said to himself; not thinking that even the blessed working man, whois free from the restraints and punctilios which bind gentlemen, has yetto stand and wait, and ask for work too, with the best.He went back to Mr. Parchemin that morning."I have been waiting for Lord Newmarch," he said; "he promised me a postabout Christmas, and now he tells me there is just as much hope asever, but no more. I must do something else. Could you not take me in asclerk in your own office? I should not mind a small salary to startwith; anything would do."Mr. Parchemin laughed, a dry and echoing "Ha, ha!" which was as dustyand dry as his office."A strange clerk you would make," he said, looking over his shoulder toconceal his amusement. "Can you engross?""Of course not. How should I? But if a man were to try--""Do you know anything about the law? Of what possible use could you beto us? No; you are a fancy article, entirely a fancy article.Government," said the old lawyer, "Government is the thing for you.""Government does not seem to see it in that light," said Edgar. "I havewaited since October.""My dear Sir! October is but three months off. You can't expect, like achild, to have your wants supplied the moment you ask for anything. Aslice of cake may be given in that way, but not an appointment. You musthave patience, Mr. Earnshaw, you must have patience," said the old man."But I have spent the half of my hundred pounds," Edgar was about tosay; but something withheld him; he could not do it. Should he notfurnish the old lawyer by so doing with an unquestionable argumentagainst himself? Should he not expose his own foolishness, thefoolishness of the man who thought himself able to give up everythingfor others, and then could do nothing but run into debt and ruin on hisown account? Edgar could not do it; he resolved rather to struggle onupon nothing, rather to starve, though that was a figure of speech, thanto put himself so much in anyone's power; which was pride, no doubt, buta useful kind of pride, which sometimes keeps an erring man out offurther trouble. He went back at once, and paid his landlord a portionof what he owed him, and removed his goods to a small upstairs roomwhich he found he could have cheap, and might have had all the time hadhe been wise enough to ask. It was the room in which his own servant hadslept when he travelled with such an appendage; but the new-born pridewhich had struggled into existence in Edgar's mind had no such ignoblepart in it as to afflict him on this account. He was quite happy to goup to his man's room, where everything was clean and homely, and felt noderogation of his personal dignity. Thank Heaven, this was one thingdone at least--a step taken, though nothing could be gained by it, onlysomething spared.In the afternoon Mr. Tottenham met him at his club, driving a pair ofhandsome horses in a smart phaeton, such a turnout as only a rich man'scan be, everything about it perfect. Edgar had not indulged in anyluxurious tastes during his own brief reign; it had been perhaps tooshort to develop them; but he recognised the perfect appointments of thevehicle with a half sigh of satisfaction and reminiscence. He did notsay, why should this man be lucky enough to have all this when I havenothing? as so many people do. He was not given to such comparisons, tothat ceaseless contrast of self with the rest of the world, which is socommon. He half smiled at himself for half sighing over the day when hetoo might have had everything that heart could desire, and smiled morethan half at the whimsical thought that he had not taken the good of hiswealth half so much then as he would have done now, had he the chance.He seemed to himself--knowing how short Edgar Arden's tenure was--to beaware of a hundred things which Edgar might have done to amuse anddelight him, which indeed Edgar Arden, knowing nothing of his own shorttenure, and believing life to be very long and much delight awaitinghim, never dreamt of making any haste to procure. A curious sense ofwell-being seemed to take hold of him as he bowled along the suburbanroads by Mr. Tottenham's side, wrapped in one of the fur coats which thechill and foggy evening made comfortable, watching the long lines oflamps that twinkled and stretched out like a golden thread, and thenwere left behind as in the twinkling of an eye. To hear of Lady MaryTottenham, who was Lady Augusta's sister, and aunt to all the youngThornleighs, seemed somehow like being wafted back to the oldatmosphere, to the state of affairs which lasted so short a time andended so suddenly; but which was, notwithstanding its brevity, the mostimportant and influential moment of his life.CHAPTER XIV.The Enchanted Palace.Tottenham's was about five miles from London on the Bayswater side. Itwas a huge house, standing upon a little eminence, and surrounded byacres of park and clouds of thick but leafless trees, which lookedghostly enough in the Winter darkness. The fog had faded away from themlong before they got so far, and had been replaced by the starlightclearness of a very cold evening; the sky was almost black, the pointsof light in it dead white, and all the landscape, so far as it wasperceptible, an Indian ink landscape in faintly differing shades ofblack and deepest grey. Nevertheless it was a relief to breathe thefresh country air, after the damp fog which had clung to their throatsand blinded their eyes. The roads were still hard, though there weresigns of the breaking up of the frost, and the horses' hoofs rang asthey dashed along."It's a nice place," Mr. Tottenham said, "though I, of course, onlybought it from the old people, who fortunately were not very venerablenor very desirable. It had a fine name before, and it was Mary's idea tocall it Tottenham's. As we cannot ignore the shop, it is as well to takethe full advantage of it. The worst thing is," he added lowering hisvoice, "it hurts the servants' feelings dreadfully. We have at lastmanaged to get a butler who sees the humour of it, and acknowledges theshop with a condescending sense that the fact of his serving ashopkeeper is the best joke in the world. You will notice aconsciousness of this highly humorous position at once in his face; butit is a bitter pill to the rest of the household. The housemaids and ourfriend behind us, cannot bear any reference to the degradation. You willrespect their feelings, Earnshaw? I am sure you will take care to show aseemly respect for their feelings."Edgar laughed, and Mr. Tottenham went on. He was a very easy man to talkwith; indeed he did most of the conversation himself, and was sopleasantly full of his home and his wife and his evident happiness, thatno one, or at least no one so sympathetic as Edgar, could havestigmatized with unkind names the lengthened monologue. There was thisexcuse for it on the other hand, that he was thus making himself and hisbelongings known to a stranger whom he had determined to make a friendof. Few people dislike to talk about themselves when they can throw offall fear of ridicule, and have a tolerable excuse for their fluency. Weall like it, dear reader; we know it sounds egotistical, and the wiserwe are the more we avoid exposing our weakness; but yet when we can feelit is safe and believe that it is justified, how pleasant it is to tellsome fresh and sympathetic listener all about ourselves! Perhaps this isone of the reasons why youth is so pleasant a companion to age, becausethe revelations on each side can be full and lengthened withoutunsuitability or fear of misconstruction. Edgar, too, possessed many ofthe qualities which make a good listener. He was in a subdued state ofmind, and had no particular desire to talk in his own person; he had nohistory for the moment that would bear telling; he was glad enough to becarried lightly along upon the stream of this other man's story, whichamused him, if nothing else. Edgar's life had come to a pause; he layquiescent between two periods, not knowing where the next tide mightlift him, or what might be the following chapter. He was like atraveller in the night, looking in through a hospitable open window atsome interior all bright with firelight and happiness, getting torecognise which was which in the household party round the fire, andlistening with a gratitude more warm and effusive than had the servicebeen a greater one, to the hospitable invitation to enter. As well mightsuch a traveller have censured the openness which drew no curtains andclosed no shutters, and warmed his breast with the sight of comfort andfriendliness, as Edgar could have called Mr. Tottenham's talkegotistical. For had not he too been called in for rest and shelter outof the night?He felt as in a dream when he entered the house, and was led through thegreat hall and staircase, and into the bright rooms to be presented toLady Mary, who came forward to meet her husband's new friend with thekindest welcome. She was a little light woman with quantities of fairhair, lively, and gay, and kind, with nothing of the worn look whichdistinguished her husband, but a fresh air, almost of girlhood, in herslight figure and light movements. She was so like some one else, thatEdgar's heart beat at sight of her, as it had not beat for years before.Gussy Thornleigh had gone out of his life, for ever, as he thought. Hehad given her up completely, hopelessly--and he had not felt at the timeof this renunciation that his love for her had ever reached the lengthof passion, or that this was one of the partings which crush allthoughts of possible happiness out of the heart. But, notwithstanding,her idea had somehow lingered about him, as ideas passionately cherisheddo not always do. When he had been still and musing, the light littlefigure, the pretty head with its curls, the half laughing, half wiselook with which this little girl would discourse to him upon everythingin earth and heaven, had got into a way of coming up before him with themost astonishing reality and vividness. "I was not so very much in lovewith Gussy," he had said to himself very often at such moments, with awhimsical mixture of surprise and complaint. No, he had not been so verymuch in love with her; yet she had haunted him all these three years.Lady Mary was only her aunt, which is not always an attractiverelationship; generally, indeed, the likeness between a pretty girl anda middle-aged woman is rather discouraging to a lover, as showing towhat plump and prosaic good condition his ethereal darling may come,than delightful; but Edgar had no sham sentiment about him, and was notapt to be assailed by any such unreal disgusts, even had there beenanything to call them forth. Lady Mary, however, was still aslightfooted and light-hearted as Gussy herself. She had the sameabundant fair hair, the same lively sweet eyes, never without thepossibility of a laugh in them, and never anything but kind. She came upto Edgar holding out both her hands."You are not a stranger to me," she said, "don't introduce him, Tom. Theonly difficulty I have about you, is how to address you as Mr.Earnshaw--but that is only for the first moment. Sit down and thaw, bothof you, and I will give you some tea--that is if you want tea. We havenobody with us for a day or two fortunately, and you will just have timeto get acquainted with us, Mr. Earnshaw, and know all our ways beforeany one else comes.""But a day or two ought to be the limit--" Edgar began, hesitating."What! you have said nothing?" said Lady Mary, hastily turning to herhusband. He put his finger on his lip."You are a most impetuous little person, Mary," he said, "you don't knowthe kind of bird we have got into the net. You think he will let youopenly and without any illusion put salt upon his tail. No greatermistake could be. Earnshaw," he added calmly, "come and let me show youyour room. We dine directly, as we are alone and above ceremony. You cantalk to my wife as much as you like after dinner--I shall go to sleep.What a blessing it is to be allowed to go to sleep after dinner," hewent on as he led the way upstairs, "especially on Saturday night--whenone is tired and has Sunday to look forward to.""Why should it be especially blessed on Saturday night?""My dear fellow," said the host solemnly, ushering his guest into alarge and pleasant room, brilliant with firelight, "it is very clearthat you have never kept a shop."And with these words he disappeared, leaving Edgar, it must be allowed,somewhat disturbed in his mind as to what it could all mean, why he hadbeen thus selected as a visitor and conducted to this fairy palace; whatit was that the wife wondered her husband had not said--and indeed whatthe whole incident meant? As he looked round upon his luxuriousquarters, and felt himself restored as it were to the life he had solong abandoned, curious dreams and fancies came fluttering about Edgarwithout any will of his own. It was like the adventure (often enoughrepeated) in the Arabian nights, in which the hero is met by somemysterious mute and blindfolded, and led into a mysterious hall, allcool with plashing fountains and sweet with flowers. These images werenot exactly suited to the wintry drive he had just taken, though thatwas pleasant enough in its way, and no bed of roses could have been soagreeable as the delightful glimpse of the fire, and all the warm andsoft comfort about him. But had he been blindfolded--had he been broughtunawares into some beneficent snare? Edgar's heart began to beat alittle quicker than usual. He did not know and dared not have whisperedto himself what the fancies were that beset him. He tried to frown themdown, to represent to himself that he was mad, that the curious freak ofhis new friend, and his own long fasting from all social intercourse hadmade this first taste of it too much for his brain. But all that hecould do was not enough to free him from the wild fancies which buzzedabout him like gnats in Summer, each with its own particular hum andsting. He dressed hurriedly and took a book by way of escaping fromthem, a dry book which he compelled himself to read, rather than gocrazy altogether. Good heavens, was he mad already? In that mysteriouspalace where the hero is brought blindfold, where he is waited on byunseen hands, and finds glorious garments and wonderful feasts magicallyprepared for him, is there not always in reserve a princess morewonderful still, who takes possession of the wayfarer? "Retro, Satanas!"cried poor Edgar, throwing the book from him, feeling his cheeks flushand burn like a girl's, and his heart leap into his throat. No greatermadness, no greater folly could be. It was no doing of his, he protestedto himself with indignation and dismay. Some evil spirit had got hold ofhim; he refused to think, and yet these dreamy mocking fancies would getinto his head. It was a relief beyond description to him when the dinnerbell rang and he could hurry downstairs. When he went into thedrawing-room, however, all the buzzing brood of thoughts which flutteredwithin him, grew still and departed in a moment; his heart ceased tothump, and an utter quiet and stillness took the place of the formercommotion. Why? Simply because he found Lady Mary and Mr. Tottenhamawaiting him calmly, without a vestige of any other convive, except aboy of twelve and a girl two years younger, who came up to him with apretty demure frankness and put out their hands in welcome."My boy and my girl," said Mr. Tottenham; "and Molly, as your mother isgoing in with Mr. Earnshaw, you must try to look very grown up for thenonce, and take my arm and walk with me.""And poor Phil must come alone!" said the little girl with mingledregret and triumph. No, it was very clear to Edgar that he himself wasnot only a fool of the first water, but a presumptuous ass, a coxcombfool, everything that was worst and vainest. And yet it had not been hisdoing; it was not he who had originated these foolish thoughts, whichhad assailed, and swarmed, and buzzed about him like a crowd of gnats orwasps--wasps was the better word; for there was spitefulness in the waythey had persisted and held their own; but now, thank heaven, they weredone with! He came to himself with a little shudder, and gave Lady Maryhis arm, and walked through the ordinary passage of an ordinary house,into a room which was a handsome dining-room, but not a mystic hall; andthen they all sat down at table, the two children opposite to him, inthe most prosaic and ordinary way."You think it wrong to have the children, Mr. Earnshaw?" said Lady Mary,"and so do I--though I like it. It is only when we are alone, and it isall their father's doing. I tell him it will spoil their digestion andtheir manners--""If it spoils Molly's manners to associate with her mother the more'sthe pity," said Mr. Tottenham, "we shall try the experiment anyhow. Whatwe call the lower classes don't treat their children as we do; theyaccept the responsibility and go in for the disagreeables; therefore,though we hate having those brats here, we go in for them on principle.Earnshaw, have you considered the matter of education? Have you anyideas on the subject? Not like your friend Lord Newmarch, who has thecorrect ideas on everything, cut and dry, delivered by the last post. Idon't want that. Have you any notions of your own?""About education?" said Edgar, "I don't think it. I fear I have fewideas on any abstract subject. The chances are that I will easily agreewith you whatever may be your opinions; heaven has preserved me fromhaving any of my own.""Then you will just suit each other," said Lady Mary, "which he andI--forgive me for letting you into our domestic miseries, Mr.Earnshaw--don't do at all, on this point; for we have both ideas, andflourish them about us unmercifully. How happy he will be as long as hecan have you to listen to him! not that I believe you will be half asgood as your word.""Ideas are the salt of life," said Mr. Tottenham; "that of course iswhat has made you look so languid for some time past."Edgar looked up in surprise. "Have I been looking languid? Have you beenobserving me?" he cried. "This is after all a fairy palace where I havebeen brought blindfolded, and where every action of my life is known."Upon this, Mr. Philip Tottenham, aged twelve, pricked up his ears. "Wereyou brought here blindfolded?" he said. "What fun! like the ArabianNights. I wish somebody would take me like that into a fairy palace,where there would be a beautiful lady--""Phil, you are talking nonsense," said his mother."Where the dinner would come when you clapped your hands, and sherbetsand ices and black servants, who would cross their arms on their breastsand nod their heads like images--It was he began it," cried Philip,breathless, getting it all out in a burst before anyone could interpose."You see how these poor children are spoilt," said Lady Mary; "yes, hehas been observing you, Mr. Earnshaw. I sent him into town three days insuccession, on purpose.""You have looked as languid as a young lady after the season," said Mr.Tottenham calmly, "till I saw there was nothing for you but the country,and a sharp diet of talks and schemes, and the ideas you scorn. When aman is happy and prosperous, it is all very well for him to do nothing;but if you happen to be on the wrong side of the hill, my dear fellow,you can't afford to keep quiet. You must move on, as Policeman X wouldsay; or your friends must keep you moving on. To-morrow is Sunday,unfortunately, when we shall be obliged to keep moderately quiet--""Is it wrong to talk on Sunday?" said the little girl, appealing gravelyto Edgar, whom for some time she had been gazing at."Not that I know of," Edgar replied with a smile; but as he looked fromone to the other of the parent pair, he said to himself that there wasno telling what theory upon this subject these excellent people mighthave. They might be desperate Sabbatarians for anything he could tell."Why do you ask Mr. Earnshaw, Molly?" said Lady Mary."Because," said Molly, "I saw his picture once. I knew him whenever Isaw him, and when I asked who it was, they said it was a very good man.So I knew it must be quite right to ask him. Papa talks more on Sundaythan on other days, though he always talks a great deal; and yet justnow he said because it is Sunday we must be quiet. Then I said tomyself, why must we be quiet on Sunday? is it wrong?""This child is too logical for our peace of mind," said Mr. Tottenham;"if it were Phil it would not matter so much, for school would soondrive that out of him.""But he is not going to school," said Lady Mary quickly."Not yet, perhaps--but some time or other, I hope; a boy has not halflived who has not been to school. I suppose politics are your strongpoint, Earnshaw? Foreign politics, to judge from what I heard Newmarchsaying. That fellow wants to pick your brains. I should not think it asubject that would pay, unless you made it your cheval de bataille,like Gordon Grant, who knows everything that happens abroad better thanthe people themselves do--who never, he tells us, see half what is goingon.""Quite true," said Lady Mary, "they never do; one doesn't in one's ownexperience. One finds out all the little incidents afterwards, andpieces them into their places.""Only it is Earnshaw who is to find out the little incidents, andNewmarch who is to piece them into their places," said her husband;"hard work for the one, great fun, and great glory besides, for theother. I don't think I should care to be jackal to Newmarch; especiallyas he means all this to be done, not by a Secretary of Legation, but bya Queen's Messenger. Do you know what kind of life that is?"Edgar shook his head. He knew nothing about it, and at this moment hedid not care very much. The buzzing and persecution of those thoughtswhich were none of his, which had a separate existence of their own, andtortured him for admission into his mind, had recommenced. What had hebeen brought here for? Why did they attempt to disgust him with the onlycareer open before him? What did they intend to do with him? The fatherand his boy might be ordinary beings enough, with whom he could havekept up an ordinary intercourse; but Lady Mary and her little daughterhad the strangest effect upon the young man. One of them was full grown,motherly, on the border of middle age--the other was but a child; yetthe tone of their voices, the turn of their heads, all suggested to himsome one else who was not there. Even little Molly had the familygestures, the throwing back of the light locks, the sweet brightness ofthe eyes, which were so playful and soft, yet so full of vivaciousspirit and life. Poor Edgar was kept in a kind of confused rapturebetween the mother and the child; both of them reflected another face,and echoed another voice to him; between them they seemed to be stealingall the strength out of him, the very heart from his bosom. He had beenabsent three years and had it all come to this, that the soft strain ofenchantment which had charmed him so softly, so lightly, never to anyheight of passion, had grown stronger with time, and moved him now moredeeply than at first? These persecuting thoughts made a swoop upon himlike a flight of birds, sweeping down through the air and surroundinghim, as he sat there helpless. Why had he been brought to thismagician's palace? What did they mean to do with him now? The child hadseen his portrait, the father had been sent to watch him, the motherasked had anything been said. What was about to be said? What were theygoing to do with him? Poor Edgar looked out as from a mist, graduallyoverwhelmed by his own excitement, and finally left the doors of hishelpless heart open, as it were, making it a highway through which anykind of futile supposition might flit and dance. He sat helpless,excited and wondering. What were they going to do with him? He did notknow.CHAPTER XV.Reality.The frost hardened again in the night, and Tottenham's was all white andshining when Edgar looked out from his window in the morning. The housewas square and somewhat ugly, but the great semi-circle of trees whichswept round it was made into something magical by the feathery silveringof the rime which coated every branch and every twig. He made anexclamation of pleasure when he looked out. The grass, the trees, theglistening pinnacles of the great conservatory which stretched to thesouth, just catching a glimpse of frosty and wavering sunlight upontheir metallic tops, were all virgin white, though here and there itbegan to melt in the sun. Edgar had been far from thinking himself happywhen he fell asleep on the previous night; he was still confused andharassed by his thoughts, keeping up a hopeless struggle against them;but he woke up in a state of causeless exhilaration, he did not knowwhy. The hoar frost and the red sunshine went to his head. His heartbeat more lightly than usual, the blood coursed pleasantly through hisveins. He was like most imaginative people, often glad, and sorry he didnot know why, and a certain unreasonable capricious confidence in hisfate came over him to-day. Something good was coming to him he feltsure.The breakfast table at Tottenham's was lively enough. Lady Mary and herhusband were in full and animated discussion about something or other,with a shoal of opened letters lying before them, and all the newspapersthat could be had, when Edgar made his appearance somewhat late. Thechildren who were present on the previous night were flanked by anothersmall pair, too small to be restrained by mamma, who chattered andcrowed, and made themselves very happy. A bright fire was burning, andthe red sunshine shone in, glinting over the white covered table and itsshining dishes."Mr. Earnshaw will agree with me," Lady Mary cried as he went in,appealing to him."Come along, Earnshaw, you will take my side," said Mr. Tottenham.They were both eager to claim his help, and the elder children looked upat him with the freedom of perfect ease and intimacy."Nobody can ever call Molly the late one, now Mr. Earnshaw is here,"cried Phil exulting. They all received him as one of themselves, and ineverything they said there was a silent suggestion that he belonged tothem, that he was to remain with them, which bewildered him beyondwords. The letters on the table were about every subject under heaven.They had their domestic correspondence, I suppose, and family affairs oftheir own; but these epistles were all about "schemes" of one kind andanother, plans for the reformation of heaven knows how many classes ofsociety, and for the improvement of the world altogether, which indeedhas great need of improvement. I cannot tell what the special questionmight be that morning; there were so many of them that it was difficultfor a stranger to discriminate; and as Lady Mary had told him, she andher husband very seldom agreed. They were both intensely in earnest, andboth threw themselves with all their might into everything they did.Edgar, however, was not in a mood to utter any oracles, or to associatehimself with one scheme or another. He was disposed to enjoy the strangeholiday which had come to him, he could not tell how. He left the fatherand mother to themselves, and addressed himself to the children."Phil," he said, "you and I are ignoramuses, we don't know about thesedeep matters. Talk to me of something within my capacity; or Molly, ifPhil will not talk, do you."The reply to this was that both children talked together."Mr. Earnshaw, the ice is bearing; what an awful pity it's Sunday!" saidthe boy, "I wanted to tell you whenever you came in--" and "Oh, Mr.Earnshaw, come to church with us, and I'll show you the village and mypet old woman who tells us stories," said the little girl.Edgar was delighted. He asked about the ice, what it was, an ornamentalpiece of water, or the village pond; and told Molly he would go and seeher village, and try whether he or she could remember most of thesermon. Phil interfered when he heard this bargain. He shook his headover the rashness of his new friend."She has an awful good memory," he said, "I wouldn't try against her,Mr. Earnshaw, if I was you. She remembers what people said ages and agesago, and comes down upon you after you have forgotten all about it. Iwouldn't go in against Moll.""But I haven't such an awfully good memory for sermons," said Molly,with modest deprecation of the excessive praise, "though I do remembermost things pretty well.""Molly will win of course; but I shall try my best," said Edgar. Thechildren suited him best on this day of exhilaration when his heart wasso foolishly free. He caught the father and mother looking at him, withsignificant glances to each other, while this conversation was going on,and was bewildered to think what they could mean. What did they mean? Itwas altogether bewildering and perplexing. The man who attended him thatmorning had informed him that he had been told off for his especialservice, and had looked somewhat offended when Edgar laughed anddeclared he required no particular tending. "I 'ad my horders, Sir,"said the man. Everybody seemed to have their orders; and if that curiousinsanity of thought which had assailed him yesterday, a running riot ofimagination, for which he did not feel himself to be responsible--ifthat came back again, tearing open the doors of his heart, and pouringthrough them, was it his fault?The village lay at the park gates; but villages so near London are notlike villages in the depths of the country. This was one where there wasa number of smaller gentlefolks, tributaries on all great occasions ofTottenham's; but when they had a chance, very glad to note anydeficiency on the part of the man whom they called a nouveau riche,and even a shopkeeper, which was the title of deepest reproach theycould think of. Indeed if Mr. Tottenham had not married Lady Mary, Ibelieve he would have had many little pricks and stings from his pooryet well-born neighbours; but a Lady Mary in English village societycannot do wrong. It was a pleasant walk to church, where they all wenttogether, the children walking demurely in honour of Sunday, thoughPhil's eye and heart were tempted by the long expanse of white whichshowed between two lines of green at the right side of the road."It is hard enough to bear the big town carriage," he saidconfidentially to Edgar, "or one of the farmer's huge carts.""We'll go and see it after church," said Edgar in the same tone; and sothe little procession moved on. Perhaps Lady Mary was the one who caredfor this family progress to church the least. Mr. Tottenham, though hewas given over to schemes of the most philosophical description, was thesimplest soul alive, doing his duty in this respect with as light aheart as his children. But Lady Mary was very "viewy." She was anadvanced liberal, and read the "Fortnightly," and smiled at many thingsthat were said out of the pulpit once a week. Sometimes even she wouldlaugh a little at the "duty" of going to church, and hearing old Mr.Burton maunder for half an hour; but all the same she respected herhusband's prejudices, and the traditions of the superior class, which,even when it believes in natural equality, still feels it necessary toset an example to its neighbours. Lady Mary professed sentiments whichwere inclined towards republicanism and democracy; but nevertheless sheknew that she was one of the gods, and had to conduct herself as becamethat regnant position among men."There goes the shopkeeper and his family," said Mrs. ColonelWitherington from her window, which looked out on the village green."Girls, it is time to put on your bonnets. A man like that is bred up tobe punctual; he comes to church as he goes to the shop, as the hourstrikes. There he goes--""As ostentatiously humble as ever," said one of the girls."And he has got one of the shopmen with him, mamma," said Myra, who wasthe wit of the family. "Not a bad looking draper's assistant; theyalways have the shopmen out on Sundays. Poor fellows, it is their onlyday.""Poor fellows, indeed! I suppose Lady Mary thinks because she is anearl's daughter she can do whatever she likes; introducing such peopleas these into the society of gentle-folks," cried the mother. "Myra,don't stand laughing there, but put on your things.""We need not go into their society unless we please," said Myra."And to be sure an Earl's daughter can do whatever she likes; nononsense of that description will make her lose caste," said theeldest Miss Witherington, turning away from the window with a sigh. Thispoor young lady, not being an Earl's daughter, had not been able to doas she liked, or to marry as she liked, and she felt the difference farmore keenly than her mother did, who was affected only in theory. Thiswas one of the many scraps of neighbourly talk which went on at HarbourGreen when the party from Tottenham's were seen walking through thevillage to church. Lady Mary was an Earl's daughter, and she did takeit upon her to do precisely as she liked; but her neighbours directedmost of their indignation upon her husband who had no such privileges, aman who was civil to everybody, and whom they all confessed, wheneverthey wanted anything of him, to be the best-natured fellow in the world.The service in the little church was not so well-conducted as it mighthave been, had Lady Mary taken more interest in it; but still the lesserauthorities had done something for the training of the choir, and agentle Ritualism, not too pronounced as yet, kept everything in acertain good order. Lady Mary herself did not take the same honest andsimple part in the devotions as her husband and children did; variousparts of the service went against her views; she smiled a little as shelistened to the sermon. A close observer might have noticed that, thoughshe behaved with the most perfect decorum, as a great lady ought, sheyet felt herself somewhat superior to all that was going on. I cannotsay that Edgar noticed this on his first Sunday at Harbour Green, thoughhe may have remarked it afterwards; but Edgar's mind was not at thepresent moment sufficiently free to remark upon individual peculiarity.The sense of novelty or something else more exciting still worked inhim, and left him in a state of vague agitation; and when the servicebeing over, Lady Mary hurried on with the children, on pretence ofcalling on some one, and left Mr. Tottenham with Edgar, the young manfelt his heart beat higher, and knew that the moment at last had come."Well, Earnshaw! you have not had much time to judge, it is true; buthow do you think you like us?" said Mr. Tottenham. The question was odd,but the questioner's face was as grave as that of a judge. "We are hastypeople, and you are hasty," he added, "so it is not so absurd as itmight be; how do you think you shall like us? Now speak out, never mindour feelings. I am not asking you sentimentally, but from a purelybusiness point of view.""I am so hasty a man," said Edgar, laughing, with a much stronger senseof the comic character of the position than the other had, "that I madeup my mind at sight, as one generally does; but since then you have sobribed me by kindness--""Then you do like us!" said Mr. Tottenham, holding out his hand, "Ithought you would. Of course if you had not liked us our whole schemewould have come to nothing, and Mary had rather set her heart on it. Youwill be sure not to take offence, or to think us impertinent if I tellyou what we thought?""One word," said Edgar with nervous haste. "Tell me first what it hasbeen that has made you take such a warm interest in me?"Mr. Tottenham winced and twisted his slim long person as a man in anembarrassing position is apt to do. "Well," he said, "Earnshaw, I don'tknow that we can enter into it so closely as that. We have always takenan interest in you, since the time when you were a great friend of theThornleigh's and we were always hearing of you; and when you behaved sowell in that bad business. And then some months ago we heard that youhad been seen coming up from Scotland--travelling," Mr. Tottenham added,with hesitation, "in the cheap way.""Who told you that?" Edgar's curiosity gave a sharpness which he had notintended to his voice."Come, come," said Mr. Tottenham good-humouredly; "that is just thepoint which I cannot enter into. But you may permit us to be interested,though we can't describe in full detail how it came about. Earnshaw,Mary and I are fanciful sort of people, as you perceive; we don't alwayskeep to the beaten path; and we want you to do us a favour. What I amgoing to ask may be a little irregular; it may sound a littleobtrusive; you may take it amiss; though I hope not--""I shall not take it amiss in any case," Edgar managed to say; but hisheart was beating very loudly, and an agitation for which he could notaccount had got possession of his whole being. His mind went wildly overa whole world of conjecture, and I need not add that he was utterlyastray in everything he thought of, and did not reach to the faintestnotion of what his companion meant to be at."In the first place," said Mr. Tottenham nervously, "it is evident thatyou must wait till there is an opening in that business with Newmarch. Idon't doubt in the least that he wants to have you, and that he'll giveyou the first vacancy; but he can't kill off a man on purpose, though Idare say he would if he could. I don't go on to say in the second place,as I might perhaps, that a Queen's Messenger has a very wearisome life,and not much to make amends for it--"Here he paused to take breath, while Edgar watched and wondered, gettingmore and more bewildered every moment in the maze of conjecture throughwhich he could not find his way."Of course," said Mr. Tottenham, himself displaying a certain amount ofrising excitement, "I don't mean to say that you ought not to acceptsuch an appointment if it was offered. But in the meantime, what are youto do? Live in London, and waste your resources, and break your spiritwith continual waiting? I say no, no, by no means; and this is what putit into my head to say what I am going to say to you, and to insistupon your coming here."What was he going to say? Still Edgar, subdued by his own excitement,could make no reply. Mr. Tottenham paused also, as if half fearing totake the plunge."What we meant, Earnshaw," he said abruptly, at last, "what Mary and Iwant, if you will do it, is--that you should stay with us and takecharge of our boy."The last words he uttered hastily, and almost sharply, as if throwingsomething out that burned him while he held it. And oh! dear reader, howcan I express to you the way in which poor Edgar fell, fell, low down,and lower down, as into some echoing depth, when these words fell uponhis dismayed and astonished ears! Take charge of their boy! God helphim! what had he been thinking about? He could not himself tell;nothing, a chimera, the foolishest of dreams, some wild fancy whichinvolved the future in a vain haze of brightness with the image of theveiled maiden in the railway carriage, and of Gussy, who was neverveiled. Oh, Heaven and earth! what a fool, what a fool he was! She hadnothing to do with it; he himself had nothing to do with it. It was buta benevolent scheme of people with a great many benevolent schemes aboutthem, for the relief of a poor young fellow whom they knew to be introuble. That was all. Edgar went on walking as in a dream, feelinghimself spin round and round and go down, as to the bottom of some well.He could hear that Mr. Tottenham went on speaking, and the hum of hisvoice made, as it were, a running accompaniment to his own hubbub ofinarticulate thoughts; Edgar heard it, yet heard it not. When he woke upfrom this confusion, it was quite suddenly, by reason of a pause in theaccompanying voice. The last words his bewildered intelligence caught upwere these:"You will think it over, and tell me your decision later. You willunderstand that we both beg you to forgive us, if we have said or doneanything which is disagreeable to you, Earnshaw. You promise me toremember that?""Disagreeable!" Edgar murmured half consciously. "Why should it bedisagreeable?" but even his own voice seemed to be changed in his ownear as he said it. He was all changed, and everything about him. "I mustgo across to the pond before I go in," he added, somewhat abruptly. "Ipromised Philip to look at the ice;" and with scarcely any furtherexcuse, set off across the grass, from which the whiteness and crispnessof the morning frosts had been stolen away by the sun. He could not getfree of the physical sensation of having fallen. He seemed to himself tobe bruised and shaken; he could do nothing with his mind but realize andidentify his state; he could not discuss it with himself. It did notseem to him even that he knew what he had been thinking of, what he hadbeen hoping; he knew only that he had fallen from some strange height,and lay at the bottom somewhere, aching and broken in heart andstrength, stunned by the fall, and so confused that he did not know whathad happened to him, or what he must do next. In this state of mind hewalked mechanically across the grass, and gazed at the frozen pond,without knowing what he was doing, and then strode mechanically awayfrom it, and went home. (How soon we begin to call any kind of a placehome, when we have occasion to use it as such!). He went home, back tohis room, the room which surely, he thought to himself, was too good forMr. Tottenham's tutor, which was the post he had been asked to occupy.Mr. Tottenham's boy's tutor, that was the phrase.It was his own repetition of these words which roused him a little; thetutor in the house; the handy man who was made to do everything; the oneindividual among the gentlemen of the house whom it was possible toorder about; who was an equal, and yet no equal. No, Edgar said tohimself, with a generous swelling of his heart, it was not thus that adependent would be treated in Mr. Tottenham's house; but the very ideaof being a dependent struck him with such sharp poignancy of surprise,as well as pain, that he could not calm himself down, or make the bestof it. He had never tasted what this was like yet. When he had made hisapplication to Lord Newmarch, the experience had not been a pleasantone; but it was short at least, and the position he had hoped for hadbeen independent at least. In it, he would have been no man's servant,but the Queen's, whom all men delight to serve. Mr. Tottenham's tutorwas a very different thing.He sat at his window, and heard without knowing the great luncheon-bellpeal out through all the echoes. He felt that he could not go downstairsto confront them all, while still in the confusion and stupor of hisdownfall; for he had sustained a downfall more terrible than anyoneknew, more bewildering than he could even realize himself; from vague,strange, delicious suspicions of something coming which might change allhis life, down to a sickening certainty of something come, which wouldindeed change everything in every way, in the estimation of the worldand of himself.Mr. Tottenham walked home very seriously on his side, after thisinterview. He had some sort of comprehension that the proposal he hadjust made was one which, at the first hearing, would not delight his newfriend; and he was sufficiently friendly and large-minded to permit theyoung man a little moment of ruffled pride, a little misery, even alittle offence, before he could make up his mind to it, notwithstandingthat it was, on the part of the Tottenhams, an impulse of almost pureand unmixed charity and kindness which had suggested it. They wereimpulsive people both, and fond of making themselves the Providence ofpoorer people; and the very best thing that can be said of them, bettereven than their universal and crotchety willingness to serve everybodywho came in their way, was their composure when the intended recipientsof their bounty hesitated, or, as sometimes happened, kicked at italtogether. Their kindnesses, their bounties, their crotchets, and theirtheories were all mixed up together, and might occasionally be lessgood, and do less good than they were meant to do; but the tolerationwhich permitted a prospective protg to weigh the benefit offered,without any angry consciousness of his want of gratitude, was admirable,and much more unusual in this world than even the kindness itself. Mr.Tottenham hurried off to his wife, and told her all about it; and thetwo together waited for Edgar's decision with sympathetic excitement,almost as much disturbed in their minds as he was, and with no indignantfeeling that their good intentions were having scanty justice. On thecontrary, they discussed the matter as they might have done something inwhich their amour propre was not at all engaged."I hope he will see it is the best thing for him," said Mr. Tottenham."Of course it is the best thing for him, and he must see it," said themore impetuous Lady Mary; but neither one nor the other declared that hewould be a fool or ungrateful if he neglected this opening, as so manyintending benefactors would. They discussed it all the afternoon, takingtheir Sunday stroll together through the greenhouses, which weresplendid, and talking of nothing but Edgar."He must do it; we must insist upon it, Tom," Lady Mary cried, growingmore and more eager."I cannot make him, dear, if he don't see it," said the husband, shakinghis head.Thus both upstairs and downstairs there was but one subject ofconsideration. The ugly things about dependence, about domestic slavery,about the equal who would not be an equal, which Edgar was saying tohimself, found no echo in the talk of the good people, full of wealthand power to benefit others, who puckered their brows on the subjectdownstairs. In this respect the thoughts of the poor man whom theywanted to befriend, were much less generous than theirs who wanted tobefriend him. He judged them harshly, and they judged him kindly. Heattributed intentions and motives to them which they were guiltless of,and thought of himself as degraded in their eyes by the kindness theyhad offered; while, in fact, he had become a most important person tothem, solely on that account--a person occupying a superior position,with power to decide against or for them, to honour or discredit theirjudgment. Indeed, I am bound to allow that Edgar was not generous at allat this moment of his career, and that his hosts were. But ah me! it isso much easier to be generous, to be tolerant, to think the best, whenyou are rich and can confer favours; so difficult to keep up youroptimist views, and to see the best side of everything, when you arepoor!"He will either come down and tell us that he accepts, or he will packhis things and go off to-night," said Lady Mary as they waited. Theywere seated in the conservatory, in the centre circle under theglittering glass dome, which had been built to give room for the greatfeathery branches of a palm tree. This was the favourite spot in whichall the pretty luxury of these conservatories culminated. Somebright-coloured Persian rugs were laid on the floor, here and there,upon which were some half-dozen chairs, half rustic and whollyluxurious. All the flowers that art can extract or force from nature inthe depth of Winter were grouped about, great moon-discs of whitecamellias, heaths covered with fairy bells, spotless primulas risingfrom out the rough velvet of their leaves. The atmosphere was soft as amoderate gentle Summer, and the great palm leaves stirred now and thenagainst the high dome of glass. Mr. Tottenham lounged on a rustic sofa,with a cloud of anxiety on his face, and Lady Mary, too anxious tolounge, sat bolt upright and listened. Why were those good peopleanxious? I cannot tell; they wanted, I suppose, to succeed in this goodaction which they had set their hearts on doing; they did not want to befoiled; and they had set their hearts upon delivering Edgar from hisdifficulties, and making him comfortable. Along with their othersentiments there was mixed a certain generous fear lest they should havebeen precipitate, lest they should have hurt the feelings and woundedthe pride of their friend whom they wished to serve. I wish there weremore of such people, and more of such susceptibilities in the world.They sat thus, until the twilight grew so deep and shadowy that theycould scarcely see each other. It was very cold outside, whereeverything began again to congeal and whiten, and all the world resigneditself with a groan to the long, long interval of dead darkness,hopelessness, and cold which must deepen before day. At the end of avista of shrubs and great evergreen plants, the red glow of thedrawing-room fire shone out, shining there like a ruddy star in thedistance. Lady Mary drew her shawl round her with a little shiver, andher husband got up and yawned in the weariness of suspense. Had he goneaway without giving an answer? Had they done nothing but harm, thoughthey had wished so much to do good. They both started like a couple ofguilty conspirators when at length a step was heard approaching, andEdgar appeared, half hesitating, half eager, against the glow of thedistant fire.CHAPTER XVI.A Pair of Philanthropists.I need not describe the many struggles of feeling which Edgar wentthrough on that memorable Sunday, before he finally made up his mind toaccept Mr. Tottenham's proposal, and do the only thing which remainedpossible for him, his only alternative between work of some sort andidleness--between spending his last little remnant of money andbeginning to earn some more--a thing which he had never yet done in hislife. It was very strange to the young man, after so long an interval ofa very different life, to return vicariously, as it were, not in his ownright, to the habits and surroundings of luxury. He felt a whimsicalinclination at first to explain to everybody he encountered that he was,so to speak, an impostor, having no right to all the good things abouthim, but being only Mr. Tottenham's upper servant, existing in theatmosphere of the drawing-room only on sufferance and by courtesy.People in such circumstances are generally, I believe, very differentlyaffected, or so at least one reads in story. They are generally picturedas standing perpetually on the defensive, looking out for offence,anticipating injury, and in a sore state of compulsory humility orrather humiliation. I do not know whether Edgar's humorous charactercould ever have been driven by ill-usage to feel in this way, but as hehad no ill-usage to put up with, but much the reverse, he took a totallydifferent view. After the first conflict with himself was over, which wehave already indicated, he came to consider his tutorship a good joke,as indeed, I am sorry to say, everybody else did--even Phil, who was inhigh glee over his new instructor."I don't know what I am to teach him," Edgar had said to the boy'sparents when he came down to the conservatory on the memorable Sunday Ihave already described, and joined the anxious pair."Teach him whatever you know," Lady Mary had answered; but Edgar's halfmirthful, half dismayed sense of unfitness for the post they thrust uponhim was not much altered by this impulsive speech."What do I know?" he said to himself next morning when, coming downearly before any one else, he found himself alone in the library, withall the materials for instruction round him. Edgar had not himself beeneducated in England, and he did not know whether such knowledge as hepossessed might not suffer from being transmitted in an unusual waywithout the orthodox form. "My Latin and Greek may be good enough,though I doubt it," he said, when Mr. Tottenham joined him, "but how ifthey are found to be quite out of the Eton shape, and therefore no goodto Phil?""Never mind the Eton shape, or any other shape," said Mr. Tottenham,"you heard what Mary said, and her opinion may be relied upon. Teach himwhat you know. Why, he is only twelve, he has time enough for mereshape, I hope."And thus Edgar was again silenced. He was, however, a tolerably goodscholar, and as it happened, in pure idleness had lately betaken himselfagain to those classical studies which so many men lay aside with theiryouth. And in the library at Tottenham's there was a crowd of booksbearing upon all possible theories of education, which Edgar, with aprivate smile at himself, carried to his room with him in detachments,and pored over with great impartiality, reading the most oppositesystems one after another. When he told Lady Mary about his studies, sheafforded immediate advice and information. She knew a great deal moreabout them than he did. She had tried various systems, each antagonisticto the other, in her own pet schools in the village, and she was farfrom having made up her mind on the subject."I confess to you frankly, Mr. Earnshaw," said Lady Mary, "sometimes Ithink we have nothing in the world to trust to but education, which isthe rational view; and sometimes I feel that I put no faith in it atall.""That is something like my own opinion," said Earnshaw, "though I havepermitted you to do yourselves the injustice of appointing me tutor toPhil.""Education, like everything else, depends so much on one's theory oflife," said Lady Mary, "Mr. Tottenham and I think differently on thesubject, which is a great pity, though I don't see that it does us muchharm. My husband is content to take things as they are, which is by muchthe more comfortable way; but that too is a matter of temperament. Philwill be sure to get on if you will bring him into real correspondencewith your own mind. Molly gives me a great deal more trouble; a man canget himself educated one way or another, a woman can't.""Is it so?" said Edgar, "pardon my ignorance. I thought most ladies wereterribly well educated.""Ah, I know what you mean!" said Lady Mary, "educated in nothings,taught to display all their little bits of superficial information. Itis not only that women get no education, Mr. Earnshaw, but how are we toget it for them? Of course an effort may be made for a girl in Molly'sposition, with parents who fully appreciate the difficulties of thematter; but for girls of the middle classes for instance? they get alittle very bad music, and worse French, and this is considerededucation. I dare say you will help me by and by in one of my petschemes. Some of my friends in town have been so very good as to join mein a little effort I am making to raise the standard. The rector here, awell-meaning sort of man, has been persuaded to join, and to give us anicish sort of schoolroom which happens to be unoccupied, and hiscountenance, which does us good with old fashioned people. I have spenta good deal of time on the scheme myself, and it is one of my chiefinterests. I quite reckon upon you to help.""What must I do?" said Edgar with a plaintive tone in his voice. Alas,worse had happened to him than falling into the hands of thieves whocould only rob him--no more. He had fallen into the hands of goodSamaritans who could do a great deal worse. He thought of ragged-schoolsand unruly infants; his thoughts went no further, and to this heresigned himself with a sigh."Then you will really help?" cried Lady Mary delighted, "I knew from thefirst you would be the greatest acquisition to us. My plan is to havelectures, Mr. Earnshaw, upon various subjects; they last only during thewinter, and a great number of girls have begun to attend. One of myfriends takes Latin, another French. Alas, our German lecturer has justfailed us! if you could supply his place it would be perfect. Then wehave history, mathematics, and literature; we cannot do much of course,but even a little is better than nothing. It would not take up very muchof your time; an hour and a half a week, with perhaps a moment now andthen to look after exercises, &c.""Am I expected to teach German to anybody in an hour and a half a week?"said Edgar, laughing. "It is a small expenditure for so great a result.""Of course you think it can only be a smattering--and that a smatteringis a bad thing?" said the social reformer, "but we really do producevery good results--you shall see if you will but try.""And what branch, may I ask, do you take?" said the ignorant neophyte."I, Mr. Earnshaw! why I learn!" cried Lady Mary; "if I could I wouldgo in for all the studies, but that is impossible. I follow as many as Ican, and find it an admirable discipline for the mind, just thatdiscipline which is denied to women. Why do you look at me so strangely?Why do you laugh? I assure you I mean what I say.""If I must not laugh, pray teach me some more philosophical way ofexpressing my feelings," said Edgar, "I fear I should laugh still moreif you did me the honour to select me as one of your instructors. A yearhence when I have been well trained by Phil, I may have a little moreconfidence in myself.""If you mean," said Lady Mary, somewhat offended, "that instructingothers is the best way to confirm your own knowledge, I am sure you arequite right; but if you mean to laugh at my scheme--""Pray pardon me," said Edgar, "I can't help it. The idea of teaching youis too much for my gravity. Tell me who the other learned pundits arefrom whom Lady Mary Tottenham learns--""Lady Mary Tottenham would learn from any man who had anything to teachher," she answered with momentary anger; then added with a short laugh,extorted from her against her will, "Mr. Earnshaw, you are veryimpertinent and unkind; why should you laugh at one's endeavour to helpone's fellow-creatures to a little instruction, and one's self--""Are you quarrelling?" said Mr. Tottenham, stalking in suddenly, withhis glass in his eye. "What is the matter? Earnshaw, I want to interestyou in a very pet scheme of mine. When my wife has done with you, let mehave a hearing. I want him to drive in with me to Tottenham's, Mary, andsee what is doing there.""I hope Mr. Earnshaw will be kinder to you than he has been to me," saidLady Mary; "at me he does nothing but laugh. He despises women, Isuppose, like so many other men, and thinks us beneath the range ofintellectual beings.""What a cruel judgment," said Edgar, "because I am tickled beyondmeasure at the thought of having anything to teach you, and at thesuggestion that you can improve your mind by attending lectures, and areundergoing mental discipline by means of mathematics and history--""Oh, then it is only that you think me too old," said Lady Mary, withthe not unagreeable amusement of a pretty woman who knows herself to benot old, and to look still younger and fresher than she feels; and theyhad an amiable laugh over this excellent joke, which entirely restoredthe friendly relations between them. Mr. Tottenham smiled reflectivelywith his glass in his eye, not looking into the matter. He was tooseriously occupied with his own affairs to enter into any unnecessarymerriment."Come along, Earnshaw," he said, "I want you to come into Tottenham'swith me, and on the way I will tell you all about my scheme, which mywife takes a great interest in also. You will come to the next evening,Mary? It is always so much more successful when you are there.""Surely," said Lady Mary with a vague smile, as she gathered up a bundleof papers which she had produced to show Edgar. She shook her head overthem as she turned away. Her husband's schemes she patronized with agentle interest; but her own occupied her a great deal more warmly aswas natural. "You have not given me half the consideration my plandeserves," she said half pathetically, "but don't think I mean to letyou off on that account," and with a friendly smile to both thegentlemen she went to her own concerns. The library had been the sceneof the conversation, and Lady Mary now withdrew to her own specialtable, which was placed in front of a great bay-window overlooking theflower-garden. It was a very large room, and Mr. Tottenham's table had aless favourable aspect, with nothing visible but dark shrubberies fromthe window behind him, to which he judiciously turned his back."Mary prefers to look out, and I to look in," he said; "to be sure Ihave her to look at, which makes a difference."This huge room was the centre of their morning occupations, and thescene of many an amiable controversy. The two tables which belonged tothe pair individually were both covered with papers, that of Lady Marybeing the most orderly, but not the least crowded, while a third largetable, in front of the fire, covered with books and newspapers, offeredscope for any visitor who might chance to join them in their viewy andspeculative seclusion. As a matter of fact, most people who came toTottenham's, gravitated sooner or later towards this room. It was thepoint of meeting in the morning, just as the palm-tree in theconservatory was the centre of interest in the afternoon."I am writing to Lyons to come to my next evening," said Mr. Tottenham,taking his place at his own table, while Lady Mary with her back towardsthe other occupants of the room scribbled rapidly at hers."Do you think they will care for Lyons?" asked Lady Mary without turninground, "you forget always that amusement and not information is whatthey want--""Amusement is what we all want, my dear," said her husband, withapologetic mildness. "We approach the subject in different ways. Youcall in the same man to instruct as I do to amuse. We agree as to theman, but we don't agree as to the object; and yet it comes to the verysame thing at last.""You think so," said Lady Mary, still with her back turned; "but weshall see by the results.""Yes, Lyons is coming," said Mr. Tottenham. "I don't know if you haveheard him, Earnshaw. He has been in Africa, and all over the world. Myown opinion is that he is rather a stupid fellow; but, so long as otherpeople don't think so, what does that matter? He is coming; and, mydear fellow, if you would listen to what I am going to tell you, andtake an interest in my people--""What would happen?" said Edgar, as the other paused. He was half amusedand half alarmed by the turn that things were taking, and did not knowwhat strange use he might be put to next."Ah, I don't know what might not happen," said Mr. Tottenham, yieldingfor a moment to the influence of Edgar's distressed but humorouscountenance. "However, don't be frightened. You shall not be forced todo anything. I don't approve of over-persuasion. But supposing that youshould be interested, as I expect, a great deal more than you think--"This he said in a deprecatory, propitiatory way, looking up suddenlyfrom the letter he was writing. Edgar stood in front of the fire,contemplating both parties, and he was half touched as well as more thanhalf amused by this look. He did not even know what it was he was calledupon to interest himself in; but the eagerness of his companions, abouttheir several plans, went to his heart."You may be sure, if there is anything I can do--" he said, impulsively."You should not allow Mr. Earnshaw to commit himself till he has seenwhat it is," said Lady Mary, from the opposite table; and then she, too,turned half round, pen in hand, and fixed an earnest gaze upon him. "Imay write to my people and tell them the German class will be resumednext week?" she said, with much the same entreating look as her husbandhad put on. It was all Edgar could do to preserve his gravity, and notreply with indecorous gaiety, like that which had provoked her before;for Lady Mary, on this point at least, was less tolerant and more easilyaffronted than her husband."If you think I can be of any use," he said, trying to look as seriousas possible; and thus, before he knew, the double bargain was made.It would be impossible to describe in words the whimsical unreality ofthe situation in which Edgar thus found himself when he got into Mr.Tottenham's phaeton to be driven back to town, in order to be madeacquainted with the other "Tottenham's." Only a few days had passedsince the wintry evening when he arrived a stranger at the hospitablebut unknown house. He was a stranger still according to all rules, butyet his life had suddenly become entangled with the lives which a weekago he had never heard of. He was no visitor, but a member of thefamily, with distinct duties in it; involved even in its eccentricities,its peculiarities, its quaint benevolences. Edgar felt his head swim asthey drove from the door which he had entered for the first time so veryshort a while ago. Was he in a dream? or had he gone astray out of theordinary workday world into some modern version of the Arabian Nights?"You remember what I told you, Earnshaw, about the shop?" said hiscompanion. "It is for the shop that I bespeak your interest now. I toldyou that my wife had no false pride on the subject, and how she curedme of my absurdity. I draw a great deal of money out of it, and I employa great number of people. Of course, I have a great responsibilitytowards these people. If they were labourers on an estate, or miners ina coal-pit, everybody would acknowledge this responsibility; but beingonly shopmen and shopwomen, or, poor souls, as they prefer to have it,assistants in a house of business, the difficulty is much increased. DoI have your attention, Earnshaw?""I am listening," said Edgar; "but you must excuse me if my attentionseems to wander a little. Consider how short an acquaintance ours is,and that I am somewhat giddy with the strange turn my life has taken.Pure selfishness, of course; but one does rank more highly than is fitin one's own thoughts.""To be sure, it is all novel and strange," said Mr. Tottenham, in asoothing and consolatory tone. "Never mind; you will soon get used toour ways. For my own part, I think a spinning mill is nothing to myshop. Several hundreds of decently dressed human creatures, some of theyoung women looking wonderfully like ladies, I can tell you, is a verybewildering sort of kingdom to deal with. The Queen rules in a vaguesort of way compared to me. She has nothing to do with our privatemorals or manners; so long as we don't rob or steal, she leaves us toour own guidance. But, in my dominions, there is all the minuteness ofdespotism. My subjects live in my house, eat my bread, and have to beregulated by my pleasure. I look after them in everything, theirreligious sentiments, their prudential arrangements, their amusements.You don't listen to me, Earnshaw.""Oh, yes, I do. But if Phil's lessons and Lady Mary's lectures come into disturb my attention, you won't mind just at first? This is the sameroad we drove down on Saturday. There is the same woman standing at thesame door.""And here are the same horses, and the same man with the same sentimentsdriving you.""Thanks; you are very kind," said Edgar, gratefully; "but my head goesround notwithstanding. I suppose so many ups and downs put one off one'sbalance. I promise you to wake up when we come to the field of battle.""You mean the shop," said Mr. Tottenham; "don't be afraid of naming it.I am rather excited, to tell the truth, about the effect it may haveupon you. I am like a showman, with something quite original and out ofthe common to show."CHAPTER XVII.The Shop.Tottenham's is situated in one of the great thoroughfares which lead outof the heart of London, towards one of its huge suburbs. It consists ofan immense square pile of building, facing to four different streets,with frontage of plate-glass windows, and masses of costly shawls andsilks appearing through. To many people, but these were mostly ladies,Tottenham's was a kind of fairyland. It represented everything, fromsubstantial domestic linen to fairy webs of lace, which money could buy.In the latter particular, it is true, Tottenham's was limited; itpossessed only the productions of modern fingers, the filmy fabrics ofFlanders and France; but its silks, its velvets, its magnificences ofshawl and drapery, its untold wealth in the homelier shape of linen andcambric, were unsurpassed anywhere, and the fame of them had spreadthroughout London, nay, throughout England. The name of this greatestablishment caused a flutter of feeling through all the Home Counties,and up even to the Northern borders. People sent their orders toTottenham's from every direction of the compass. The mass of its clientswere, perhaps, not highly fashionable, though even the crme de lacrme sometimes made a raid into the vast place, which was reportedcheap, and where fashionable mothers were apt to assure each other thatpeople, who knew what was what, might often pick up very nice thingsindeed at half the price which lise would ask, not to speak of Worth.Persons who know what Worth has last invented, and how lise works, havean immense advantage in this way over their humble neighbours. But thehumble neighbours themselves were very good customers, and bought morelargely, if with less discrimination. And the middle class, like oneman, or rather like one woman, patronized Tottenham's. It bought itsgowns there, and its carpets and its thread and needles, everything thatis wanted, in a house. It provided its daughters' trousseaux, andfurnished its sons' houses out of this universal emporium; not thechairs and tables, it is true, but everything else. The arrangements ofthe interior were so vast and bewildering as to drive a stranger wild,though the habitus glided about from counter to counter with smilingreadiness. There were as many departments as in the Home Office, buteverybody looked after his own department, which is not generally thecase in the Imperial shop; and the hum of voices, the gliding about ofmany feet, the rustle of many garments, the vague sound and sentiment ofa multitude pervaded the alleys of counters, the crowded passagesbetween, where group was jostled by group, and not an inch of space leftunoccupied.Edgar's entrance into this curious unexplored world, which he had beenbrought here expressly to "take an interest" in, was made through aprivate way, through the counting-house, where many clerks sat at theirdesks, and where all was quiet and still as in a well-ordered merchant'soffice. Mr. Tottenham had a large room, furnished with themorocco-covered chairs and writing-tables consecrated to such places,but with more luxury than usual; with Turkey carpets on the floor, andrich crimson curtains framing the great window, which looked into asmall court-yard surrounded with blank walls. Here Mr. Tottenham pausedto look over a bundle of business letters, and to hear some reports thatwere brought to him by the heads of departments. These were not entirelyabout business. Though the communications were made in a low voice,Edgar could not help hearing that Mr. So-and-So was in question here,and Miss Somebody there."If something is not done, I don't think the other young ladies willstand it, Sir," said a grave elderly gentleman, whom Edgar, eyeing himcuriously, felt that he would have taken at least for a Member ofParliament."I will look into it, Robinson. You may make your mind quite easy. Iwill certainly look into it," said Mr. Tottenham, with such a look asthe Chancellor of the Exchequer may put on when he anticipates a failurein the revenue."You see, Sir," added Mr. Robinson, "a piece of scandal about any of theyoung ladies is bad enough; but when it comes to be the head of adepartment, or at least, one of the heads--and you remember it was allour opinions that Miss Lockwood was just the fit person for the place.I had a little difficulty myself on the point, for Miss Innes had beenlonger in the establishment; but as for being ladylike-looking, and agood figure, and a good manner, there could, of course, be nocomparison.""I will look into it, I will look into it," said Mr. Tottenham,hurriedly.The head of a State has to bear many worries, in small things as well asin great; and the head of Tottenham's was less a constitutional than adespotic ruler. Limited Monarchies do not answer, it must be allowed, ona small scale. The respectable Mr. Robinson withdrew to one side, whileother heads of departments approached the Sultan of the Shop. Edgarlooked on with some amusement and a good deal of interest. Mr. Tottenhamwas no longer speculative and viewy. He went into all the businessdetails with a precision which surprised his companion, and talked ofthe rise in silks, and the vicissitudes in shirtings, with very muchmore apparent perception of the seriousness of the matter than he hadever evidenced in the other Tottenham's, the wealthy house in which theshopkeeper lived as princes live. Edgar would have retired when thesebusiness discussions, or rather reports and audiences, began; but Mr.Tottenham restrained him with a quick look and gesture, motioning him toa seat close to his own."I want you to see what I have to do," he said in a rapid interjectionbetween one conference and another.The last of all was a young man, studiously elegant in appearance, andin reality, as Edgar found out afterwards, the fine gentleman of theestablishment, who had charge of the recreations of "the assistants," orrather the employs, which was the word Mr. Watson preferred. Mr.Tottenham's face lighted up when this functionary approached him with apiece of paper, written in irregular lines, like a programme, in hishand--and it was the programme of the next evening entertainment, to begiven in the shop and for the shop. Mr. Watson used no such vulgarphraseology."Perhaps, Sir, you will kindly look over this, and favour us with anyhint you may think necessary?" he said. "Music is always popular, and aswe have at present a good deal of vocal talent among us, I thought itbest to utilize it. The part-songs please the young ladies, Sir. It isthe only portion of the entertainment in which they can take any activeshare.""Then by all means let us please the ladies," said Mr. Tottenham. "Look,Earnshaw; this is an entertainment which we have once a month. Ah,Watson, you are down, I see, for a solo on your instrument?""I find it popular, Sir," said Mr. Watson, with a smirk. "The taste formusic is spreading. The young ladies, Sir, are anxious to know whether,as you once were good enough to promise, her Ladyship is likely thistime to do us the honour--""Oh, yes, Watson; you may consider that settled; my wife is coming,"said Mr. Tottenham. "Trial Scene in Pickwick? Yes; very well, verywell. Duet, Mr. Watson and Miss Lockwood. Ah! I have been just hearingsomething about Miss Lockwood--""She has enemies, Sir," said Mr. Watson, flushing all over. He was afair young man, and the colour showed at once in his somewhat pallidcomplexion. "In an establishment like this, Sir--a little world--wherethere are so many employs, of course, she has her enemies.""That may be," said Mr. Tottenham, musing. "I have not inquired into ityet; but in the meantime, if there is any latent scandal, wouldn't it bebetter that she took no public part?""Oh, of course, Sir!" cried Watson, bundling up his papers; "if she isto be condemned unheard--"Robinson, the respectable Member of Parliament, approached anxiously atthis."I assure you, Mr. Tottenham," he cried, with a warmth of sinceritywhich appeared to come from the bottom of his heart, "I don't want tojudge Miss Lockwood, or any other young lady in the establishment; butwhen things come to my ears, I can't but take notice of them. The otheryoung ladies have a right to be considered.""It is jealousy, Sir; nothing but jealousy!" cried Watson; "becauseshe's a deal more attractive than any of 'em, and gets more attention--""Softly, softly," said Mr. Tottenham. "This grows serious. I don't thinkI am apt to be moved by jealousy of Miss Lockwood, eh, Watson? You maygo now, and if you know anything about the subject, I'll see youafterwards.""I know as she's the best saleswoman, and the most ladylike-lookingyoung lady in the house," cried Watson; and then he perceived his slipof grammar, and blushed hotter than ever; for he was an ambitious youngman, and had been instructed up to the point of knowing that his nativeEnglish stood in need of improvement, and that bad grammar was againsthis rising in life."That will do then; you can go," said Mr. Tottenham. "Opinion is notevidence. Come, Robinson, if it's making a feud in the house, I hadbetter, I suppose, go into it at once.""And I, perhaps, had better withdraw too," said Edgar, whom this strangeand sudden revelation of human tumults going on in the great house ofbusiness had interested in spite of himself."Stay; you are impartial, and have an unbiassed judgment," said Mr.Tottenham. "Now, Robinson, let us hear what you have got to say."Robinson approached with a world of care upon his face. Edgar havingallowed his fancy to be taken possession of by the Member-of-Parliamenttheory, could not help the notion that this good worried man had risento call for a Committee upon some subject involving peril to the nation,some mysterious eruption of Jesuits or Internationalists, or ForeignOffice squabble. He was only the head of the shawl and cloak departmentin Tottenham's; but it is quite marvellous how much humanity resemblesitself, though the circumstances were so unlike.Mr. Robinson had not much more than begun his story. He was in thepreamble, discoursing, as his prototype in the House of Commons wouldhave done, upon the general danger to society which was involved incarelessness and negligence of one such matter as that he was about tobring before the House--when a tap was heard at the door, a little sharptap, half defiant, half coquettish, sounding as if the applicant, whileimpatient for admittance, might turn away capriciously, when the doorwas opened. Both the judge and the prosecutor evidently divined at oncewho it was."Come in," said Mr. Tottenham; "Come in!" for the summons was notimmediately obeyed.Then there entered a--person, to use the safe yet not very respectfulword which Mr. J. S. Mill rescued from the hands of flunkeys andpolicemen--a female figure, to speak more romantically, clad in elegantblack silken robes, very well made, with dark hair elaborately dressed;tall, slight, graceful, one of those beings to be met with everywhere inthe inner recesses of great shops like Tottenham's, bearing all theoutward aspect of ladies, moving about all day long upon rich carpets,in a warm luxurious atmosphere, "trying on" one beautiful garment afteranother, and surveying themselves in great mirrors as they pass andrepass. The best of feminine society ebbs and flows around thesesoft-voiced and elegant creatures--duchesses, princesses, who look likewasherwomen beside them, and young girls often not more pretty orgraceful. They are the Helots of the female fashionable world, and, atthe same time, to some degree, its despots; for does not many a dumpywoman appear ridiculous in the elegant garb which was proved before hereyes so beautiful and becoming upon the slim straight form of the "youngperson" who exhibited and sold if?Miss Lockwood entered, with her head well up, in one of the attitudeswhich are considered most elegant in those pretty coloured pictures ofthe "Modes," which, to her class of young ladies, are as the Louvre andthe National Gallery thrown into one. She was no longer, except from aprofessional point of view, to be considered absolutely as a "younglady." Her face, which was a handsome face, was slightly worn, and herage must have been a year or two over thirty; but, as her accuseradmitted, and as her defender asserted, a more "ladylike-looking"person, or a better figure for showing off shawl or mantle had neverbeen seen in Tottenham's or any other house of business. This was hergreat quality. She came in with a little sweep and rustle of her longblack silken train; her dress, like her figure, was her stock-in-trade."Oh, I beg your pardon," she said in an abrupt yet airy tone, angry yetsensible withal of those personal advantages which made it something ofa joke that anyone should presume to find fault with her. "I hear mycharacter is being taken away behind my back, and I have come, please,to defend myself."Edgar looked at this kind of being, which was new to him, with a mixtureof feelings. She had the dress and appearance of a lady, and she wasunquestionably a woman, though she would have scorned so common a name.He rose from his seat when she came in with the intention of getting achair for her, as he would have done to any other lady, but wasdeterred, he could scarcely tell why, by her own air and that of theother two men who looked at her without budging."Sit down, sit down," said Mr. Tottenham hastily, aside to him, "ofcourse I know what you mean, but that sort of thing does not do. Itmakes them uncomfortable; sit down; she will give us trouble enough, youwill see."Edgar, however, could not go so far as to obey. He kept standing, and hesaw the new-comer look at him, and look again with a lighting up of herface as though she recognised him. So far as he was aware he had neverseen her before in his life."Miss Lockwood, I do not think this is how you should speak," said heremployer, "you know whether I am in the habit of permitting anybody'scharacter to be taken away, without giving the accused full opportunityto defend themselves.""Oh yes, Sir, to defend themselves," she said with a toss of her head,"after all the harm's done, and things has been said that can't beunsaid. You know as well as I do, Sir, it's all up with a young ladythe moment things has been spoke of publicly against her.""I hope not so bad as that," said Mr. Tottenham mildly. He was a littleafraid of the young lady, and so was the worthy parliamentary Robinson,who had withdrawn a step behind backs, when interrupted in his speech."Well, Mr. Tottenham! and what does it mean, Sir, when you put a stop tomy duet, me and Mr. Watson's duet, and say it's best I shouldn't takepart publicly? Isn't that judging me, Sir, before ever hearing me--andtaking all the stories as is told against me for true?""I know none of the stories yet," said Mr. Tottenham, "pray composeyourself. Mr. Robinson was going to explain to me; but as you are here,if it will at all save your feelings, I am quite ready to hear yourstory first.""Mr. Tottenham, Sir!" said Mr. Robinson, roused to speech."Well! you can have no motive, and I can have no motive, but to come tothe truth. Take a seat, Miss Lockwood, I will not keep you standing; andbegin--"Begin what?" the young woman faltered. "Oh, I am not going to be theone to begin," she said saucily, "nobody's obliged to criminate himself.And how can I tell what my enemies are saying against me? They mustspeak first.""Then, Robinson, do you begin," said the master; but it was easier inthis case to command than to obey. Robinson shifted from one foot to theother, he cleared his throat, he rubbed his hands. "I don't know that Ican, before her," he said hoarsely, "I have daughters of my own.""I knew," said the culprit in triumphant scorn, "that you daren't makeup any of your stories before my face!"Robinson restrained himself with an effort. He was a good man, thoughthe fuss of the incipient scandal was not disagreeable to him."It's--it's about what is past, Sir," he said hurriedly, "there is noreflection on Miss Lockwood's conduct now. I'd rather not bring it allup here, not before strangers.""You may speak before as many strangers as you please, I sha'n't mind,"said the accused, giving Edgar a glance which bewildered him, not somuch for the recognition which was in it, as for a certain confidenceand support which his appearance seemed to give her. Mr. Tottenham drewhim aside for a moment, whispering in his ear."She seems to know you, Earnshaw?""Yes; but I don't know how. I never saw her before.""I wonder--perhaps, if I were to take Robinson away and hear hisstory--while you might hear what she has to say?""I? But indeed I don't know her, I assure you I have never seen herbefore," said Edgar in dismay."Never mind, she knows you. She is just the sort of person to prefer toconfide in one whom she does not see every day. I'll leave you withher, Earnshaw. Perhaps it will be best if you step this way, Robinson;I shall hear what you have to say here."Robinson followed his superior promptly into a smaller room. Edgar wasleft with the culprit; and it is scarcely possible to realize a lesscomfortable position. What was he to do with her? He was not acquaintedeither with her or her class; he did not know how to address her. Shelooked like a lady, but yet was not a lady, and for the present momentshe was on her trial. Was he to laugh, as he felt inclined to do, at theshabby trick his friend had played him, or was he to proceed gravelywith his mission? Miss Lockwood solved this question for herself.CHAPTER XVIII.Two Culprits on their Trial."You're surprised, Sir, that a stranger should be so ready to speak upto you," said Miss Lockwood, "you don't know me from Adam? but I knowyou. You are the gentleman that was in the great Arden case, thegentleman as gave up. You wouldn't think it, but I am mixed up with theArdens too; and as soon as I set eyes upon you, I said to myself, 'Hereis one that will help me to my rights.'""Have you, too, rights that involve the Ardens?" said Edgar, startledyet half amused. "Alas, I fear I cannot help you. If you know my storyyou must know I am no Arden, and have no influence with the family oneway or another.""You mightn't have influence, Sir, but you might hate 'em--as I do," shesaid, with a gleam in her eyes which changed the character of herotherwise commonplace though handsome countenance."Hate them!" cried Edgar, still more startled. "Why, this is a tragicalway of approaching the subject. What have the Ardens done to you thatyou should hate them?""That's my story," said Miss Lockwood, meeting him full with a steadfastlook in her eyes, which bewildered Edgar still more. She had taken aseat, and the two sat looking at each other across Mr. Tottenham'swriting table. Edgar had not even heard the name of Arden for yearspast, and nothing was further from his thoughts on entering this mostcommonplace of scenes, the great shop, than to be thrown back into hisown past life, by the touch of one of the young ladies in the shawl andmantle department. His curiosity was awakened, but not in any highdegree, for it was absurd to suppose that a shopwoman in Tottenham'scould have any power to affect the Ardens one way or another. He feltthat this must be a tempest in a teacup, some trifling supposedinjustice, something, perhaps, about a cottage on the estate, or therancour of a dismissed servant; for he had heard vaguely that there hadbeen considerable changes."I am afraid I cannot sympathize with you in hating the Ardens," hesaid; "if you know so much about me, you must know that I was brought upto regard Mrs. Arden as my sister, which I still do, notwithstanding thechange of circumstances; and no one connected with her can be to me anobject of hate.""Mrs. Arden, indeed!" said Miss Lockwood with contemptuous emphasis,tossing her handsome head."Yes. What has Mrs. Arden done to you?" said Edgar, half angry, halfamused with what seemed to him the impotent spitefulness; the absurdityof the woman's scorn struck him with ludicrous effect; and yet a certainuneasiness was in the puzzle. Clare Arden had never possessed thatnatural instinctive courtesy which makes dependents friends. Probablyshe had wounded the amour propre of the shopwoman; but then no doubtshopwomen have to make up their minds to such wounds, and Mrs. Arden wasmuch too well bred and much too proud to have gone out of her way toannoy a young lady at Tottenham's--any offence given or taken must havebeen a mere inadvertence, whatever it was."Done to me? Oh, she haven't done nothing to me, not meaningly, poorcreature," said Miss Lockwood. "Poor thing! it's me that has that in mypower, not her.""I wish you would tell me," said Edgar seriously, leaning across thetable towards her with deepened interest and a certain alarm, "I entreatyou to tell me what you mean. You are right in thinking that no subjectcould be more interesting to me.""Ah! but it ain't, perhaps, the kind of interest I expected," said MissLockwood with coquettish familiarity, pushing back her chair. Shebelonged to the class of women who delight to make any conversation,however trivial or however important, bear the air of a flirtation. Shewas quite ready to play with her present companion, to excite andtantalize his curiosity, to laugh at him, and delude him, if fortunefavoured her. But a chance altogether unforeseen interrupted this notunpleasant operation, and threw Miss Lockwood and her mystery into, theshade. When the conversation had advanced thus far, a new personagesuddenly appeared on the scene. With a little preliminary knock, butwithout waiting for any invitation, a lady opened the door, the sight ofwhom drove even Clare Arden out of Edgar's mind. She was no longeryoung, and her days of possible beauty were over. At sight of her Edgarrose to his feet, with a sudden cry.For a moment the new-comer stood still at the door, looking at theunexpected scene. Her face was care-worn, and yet it was kind, revealingone of those mixtures of two beings which are to be seen so often insociety--the kind, genial, gentle woman made by nature, with theconventional great lady, formed for her position, and earnestly strivingas her highest duty to shape herself into the narrowness and worldlinesswhich it demanded. This curious development of mingled good and evil hasnot, perhaps, had so much notice as it deserves from the observer. Weare all acquainted with characters in which a little germ of goodnessstrives against natural dispositions which are not amiable; but theother compound is not less true, if perhaps more rare. Lady AugustaThornleigh, who was Lady Mary Tottenham's sister, was born one of thekindest souls that ever drew breath. She had it in her even to be"viewy" as Lady Mary was, or to be sentimentally yielding and eager foreverybody's happiness. But all her canons of duty bound her to regardthese dispositions as weakness, almost as guilt, and representedworldliness to her as the highest of virtues. She sighed after this asthe others sigh after the higher heights of self-denial. Her searchingsof heart were all directed (unconsciously) to make the worse appear thebetter cause; she tried to be worldly, believing that was right, asother people try to be unworldly. But I do wrong to keep Lady Augustastanding at the door of Mr. Tottenham's room, while I describe hercharacteristics to the reader. She came in, calmly unexpectant of anysight but that of her brother-in-law; then starting to see two people,man and woman, seated on either side of the table with every appearanceof being engaged in interesting conversation, made a step back again,bewildered."I beg your pardon, I thought Mr. Tottenham was here," she said,dropping her veil, which she had raised on entering. Miss Lockwoodsprang up from her chair which she pushed back with an appearance offlurry and excitement, which was either real or very well counterfeited;while Edgar, deeply vexed, he could scarcely have told why, to be foundthus, rose too, and approached his old friend. He would have liked toput himself at her feet, to kiss her hand, to throw himself upon her oldkindness, if not like a son with a mother, at least like a loyal servantof one of those queens of nature whom generous men love to serve likesons. But he dared not do this--he dared not exceed the bounds ofconventional acquaintance. He went forward eagerly but timidly, holdingout his hands. I cannot find words to say how bewildered Lady Augustawas by the sight of Edgar, or with what consternation she recognisedhim. Whatever the motive had been which had drawn to him the attentionof the Tottenhams, Lady Augusta Thornleigh was altogether ignorant ofit. She had no expectation of seeing him, no idea that he could crossher path again. The profound surprise, the rush of kindly feeling whichthe first sight of him called forth, the thrill of terror and sense ofdanger which accompanied it, made her tremble with sudden agitation.Good heavens! what was she to do? She could not decline to recognisehim; her heart indeed yearned to him, the subject of so much misfortune;but all the new complications that his presence would produce, rose upbefore her as he approached and made her heart sick. Oh, if he wouldonly take the hint given in her hesitating look, and the veil which shehad dropped over her face! But Edgar was fond of his old friend. She wasthe sister of his hostess, and he had felt ever since he went toTottenham's that one day or other he must meet her. He tried even atthat moment to forget that she was anything beyond an old friend andLady Mary's sister; he tried to put the thought out of his mind that shewas the mother of Gussy, his only love; he tried to forget the formerrelations between them. He had not seen her since the day when, leavinghis former home, a nameless being, without either future or past toconsole him, he had been touched to the heart by her hurried farewell.He was then in all the excitement of a great sacrifice; he was a hero,admired and pitied everywhere; he had been almost her son, and she hadcalled him Edgar, and wept over him. What a difference! he was astranger now, in a totally different sphere, fallen out of knowledge,out of sympathy, no longer a hero or representing any exciting break inthe ordinary level of life; but a common man probably desirous of askingsome favour, and one for whom all his former friends must have thetroublesome sensation of feeling something ought to be done for--I donot know if this occurred to Edgar's mind, who was little apt to makesuch claims, but it did occur to Lady Augusta."Is it you?--Mr. ----?" she said faltering. She was not even sure of hisnew name."Earnshaw," he said; "Edgar Earnshaw; you recollect me even after allthese years?""Oh, surely. Of course I cannot but recollect you," she said; "but I amtaken by surprise. I did not know you were in England. I never couldhave expected to find you here.""No," said Edgar, chilled by her tone, and letting the hand drop whichshe had given him, he felt, with hesitation. "It seems to myself thelast place in the world where I could be; but Mr. Tottenham is so kindas to wish--"What was Mr. Tottenham so kind as to wish? I cannot describe LadyAugusta's perplexity. Did it mean that Edgar had been so far reduced asto require employment in the shop? Had he come to that--he who was allbut engaged to Gussy once? The idea gave her an indescribable shock; butthen, how foolish of Mr. Tottenham, knowing all he did of Gussy and herobstinacy, and how she had all but broken her parents' hearts byrefusing the best of offers, and threatened to go into a sisterhood,and came constantly to this very place to visit and influence the "youngladies" of the establishment! Lady Augusta grew red and grew pale in theagitation of her feelings; but what could she say? She could not ask himpoint-blank if this were so; she could not, after all these years, throwherself once more upon his chivalry, as she had done before, and implorehim to keep out of her daughter's way. The only way of outlet she foundfor her excitement and confusion was to look severely at Miss Lockwood,who stood with her hands folded, and an ingratiating smile on her face,stooping slightly forward, as who should say, What can I have thepleasure of showing your ladyship?Lady Augusta gave this "person" a withering glance. She was indignantwith her for appearing to be on intimate terms with this man, whom, hadLady Augusta been wise, she would have gladly married off at once toanybody, so that he might be got out of her child's way. But, being avery natural woman, with a great many tender prejudices and motherlyfeelings, she was a little haughty and offended that, having knownGussy, he should decline to such a level as Miss Lockwood. Gussy was notfor him, and his very existence was a danger for her; but still, that heshould be inconstant to Gussy, was to her mother a wrong and offence."I fear," she said, in her stateliest tone, "that I am interruptingyou--that you were particularly engaged.""Oh no, your Ladyship, nothing but what can wait," murmured MissLockwood, gliding off with a curtsey, and adding a sidelong half nod ofleave-taking to Edgar, which made him hot with anger, yet was too absurdin its impertinence to be resented. Lady Augusta drew herself up moreand more."I can't tell you how sorry I am to have interrupted a--conversation--aninterview. I expected to find my brother-in-law here.""Indeed, you have interrupted nothing," said Edgar. "Mr. Tottenham, Idon't know why, left me here with this--lady, while he went to make someinquiries about her; he will return directly. She had offered to explainher case, of which I knew nothing, to me," he continued, with anembarrassed laugh, feeling himself grow red against his will. What didit matter to Lady Augusta whom he might converse with? But,notwithstanding, her manner was as that of a woman offended, and formingan unfavourable judgment, and Edgar was affected by this unspokenjudgment in spite of himself.Then a pause ensued. Miss Lockwood had glided out of the room with herlong train rustling, but no other sound, and Lady Augusta, like otherless exalted persons, did not know what to say to carry on this curiousconversation. She was not sufficiently in friendship with Edgar to sayanything further to him on this subject, either as warning or reproving,and there was an awkward pause. He would have liked to put a hundredquestions, but did not know how to begin."I hope all are well," he said at last, with some timidity."Oh, quite well. There have been various changes in the family, as nodoubt you have heard; and more are in prospect," Lady Augusta saidpointedly: "That is the worst of grown-up sons and daughters. Aftertwenty, their father and mother have very little enjoyment of them. Iwas not aware you knew my brother-in-law."This she said with something of a jerk, having forestalled all possibleinquiry on Edgar's side, as she thought."I only met him a few days ago," said Edgar. "Perhaps I had better tellyou at once my position in respect to him. He has offered me the post oftutor to his boy; and having nothing to do for the moment, poor as myqualifications are, I have accepted it. I need not tell you, who knowthem, how kind to me both he and Lady Mary have been.""Tutor to--his boy!" Lady Augusta repeated the words, thunderstruck.This was something more terrible, more alarming than she had conceivedpossible. "Tutor to Phil?" She did not seem able to do more than repeatthe words."You may well be surprised," said Edgar, trying to laugh; "no one couldbe more so than myself; but as they were so good as to overlook mydeficiencies, what could I say?""I was not thinking of your deficiencies. Oh! Mr. Earnshaw, oh! Edgar,could not your old friends have helped you to something better thanthis?"Poor Lady Augusta! she was unfeignedly grieved and sorry to think of himas a dependent. And at the same time she was struck with terrorunbounded to think that he would now be always in her way, in Gussy'sway, never to be got rid of. She was not fond of exercising whatinfluence she possessed lavishly, for she had many sons and nephews; butshe began to reflect immediately what she could do to promote Edgar'sinterests. A tutor, and in Tottenham's, for ever; or in Berkeley Square,always at hand, never to be got rid of--"Dear me!" she cried, "tell me whom I should speak to. We must not letyou vegetate in such a post as this."I don't think Edgar had much difficulty in divining what she meant, orwhich branch of the subject had most effect on her mind. And, perhaps,he was slightly irritated by his insight, though this effect very soonwent off."Thank you," he said, "for the moment I am well enough pleased with myposition. Everybody is very kind to me; and, after so long abstinence, alittle pleasant society is an agreeable change."He was sorry after he had said this, for he liked Lady Augusta. Hercountenance fell. She gave an alarmed glance at the door, where therewas a passing sound as of some one approaching."I should not have thought you would have liked it," she said, with alittle sigh. "Do you know where Mr. Tottenham is? I want to speak tohim just for a moment. Thanks so much. I will wait here till he comes.""I shall attend to it--you may be sure I will attend to it," said Mr.Tottenham's voice, making itself audible before he himself appeared."You were quite right, Robinson, quite right, and you may be sure I willpay every attention. Ah, Lady Augusta, you here. What! and you havefound out our friend? I meant that for a little surprise to you. Yes,here he is, and I hope to hold him fast, at least till something verymuch better turns up--a thing which will happen, I am afraid, quite toosoon for us.""Let us hope so, for Mr. Earnshaw's sake," said Lady Augusta, with alittle solemnity. How different her tone was from that of herbrother-in-law! Perhaps, on the whole, her personal liking for Edgar wasstronger than his was; but there were so many things mingled with itwhich made this liking impossible. Her very person seemed to stiffen asshe spoke, and she made a little pause, as Lord Newmarch had done beforepronouncing his name. "Mr.--Earnshaw." To be sure it must be difficult,having known him by one name to speak to him by another; but somehowthis little pause seemed to Edgar another painful reminder that he wasnot as he had once been.And then there ensued another embarrassed pause. Edgar could not sayanything, for his feelings at the moment were somewhat bitter; and asfor good Mr. Tottenham, he was perplexed and perturbed, not perceivingany reason why his sister-in-law should put on so solemn an expression.He had expected nothing less than to please her and all her family, byhis kindness to the man whom he persisted in considering their friend.He was profoundly perplexed by this stiffness and air of solemnity. Hadthere been some quarrel, of which he knew nothing, between them? He wasdumb in his bewilderment, and could not think of anything to say."Did Miss Lockwood tell you much? or was she frightened?" he said. "Itis a troublesome story, and I wish people would not be so horriblyofficious in reporting everything. Did she open her heart at all toyou?"Mr. Tottenham looked at him with calm matter-of-fact seriousness, andLady Augusta looked at him with suspicious disapproval. To the woman ofthe world the question seemed absurd, to the man of ideas it was assimple as daylight; between them they embarrassed the altogetherinnocent third party, who had a clue to both their thoughts."She told me nothing," said Edgar, "as indeed how should she, neverhaving spoken to me before to-day? She had seen me, she says, threeyears ago, at the time of the arrangement about Arden, and she chose totalk to me of that, heaven knows why.""Was that what you were talking about when I came in?" said LadyAugusta, with a cold ring of unbelief in her tone, a tone whichirritated Edgar deeply in spite of himself."It was what we were talking of," he said, concisely; and then Mr.Tottenham felt sure there had been some previously existing quarrel ofwhich he knew nothing, and that his attempt to give pleasure had been sofar a failure. This momentarily discouraged him--for to do harm, whereyou would fain have done good, is confusing to every well-intentionedsoul."Mary will be glad to hear something of your movements," he said. "Shehas been anxious for some time past to know what you were going to do.""I came to tell you," said Lady Augusta. "We are in town for a fewweeks, chiefly about business, for my little Mary has made up her mindto leave me; and as it has all been made up in a hurry, there will be agreat deal to do.""Made up her mind to leave you?""Yes, don't you understand? She is going to marry Lord Granton, theMarquis of Hautville's son. Yes, you may congratulate me; it is verypleasant, and just such a match as one could have wished; and afterHelena's sad business," said Lady Augusta, with a sigh, "we wantedsomething to console us a little.""I think Helena's was a very sensible marriage," said Mr. Tottenham;"just the man for her; but I am glad your pride is going to have thissalve all the same, and I daresay Mary will be delighted, for she is adreadful little aristocrat, notwithstanding her own foolish marriage,and all she says.""If every foolish marriage ended as well as Mary's--" said LadyAugusta."Ah! you mean if every parvenu was rich?" said Mr. Tottenham; "butthat, unfortunately, is past hoping for. So you have come to town forthe trousseau? I hope your Ladyship means to patronise the shop.""My dear Tom--" Lady Augusta began, her face clouding over."Before your sister's time, I too was ashamed of the shop," he said, "ifI am not now, it is Mary's doing. And so her little godchild is to be agreat lady! I am very glad for your sake, Augusta, and I hope the littlething will be happy. Does she know her own mind? I suppose Thornleigh isvery much pleased.""Delighted!" cried Lady Augusta, "as we all are; he is a charmingfellow, and she is as happy as the day is long.""Ah, we are all charming fellows, and everybody makes the best of us atthat period of our lives," said Mr. Tottenham; "all the same I am gladto hear everything is so pleasant. And Gussy? What does Gussy say?""Mr. Tottenham!" Lady Augusta cried in an indignant whisper; and thenshe added, "tell Mary I shall come and tell her all about it. I must notdetain you any longer from your business. Good-bye, Mr. Earnshaw.""Earnshaw will see you to your carriage," said Mr. Tottenham, "I am verybusy--don't think me careless; and I know," he added in a lower tone,"you will like, when you are happy yourself, to say a kind word to anold friend."Happy herself! does a woman ever inquire whether she is personally happyor not when she has come to Lady Augusta's age, and has a large familyto care for? She took the arm which Edgar could not but offer with animpatient sigh."Mr. Earnshaw does not require to be told that I wish him everythingthat is good," she said, and allowed him to lead her out, wondering howshe should manage to warn Beatrice, her youngest daughter, who had comewith her, and who was looking at something in one of the manydepartments. The young Thornleighs were all fond of Edgar, and LadyAugusta dared not trust a young firebrand of nineteen to go and spreadthe news all over the family, without due warning, that he had appearedupon the scene again. Edgar's short-lived anger had before this floatedaway, though his heart ached at the withdrawal from him of thefriendship which had been sweet to his friendly soul. His heart meltedmore and more every step he walked by her side."Lady Augusta," he said at last hurriedly, "you were once as kind as anangel to me, when I wanted it much. Don't be afraid of me; I shall neverput myself in your way.""Oh, Mr. Earnshaw!" she cried, struck by compunction; "I ought to askyour pardon, Edgar; I ought to know you better; don't judge me harshly.If you only knew--""I don't ask to know anything," he said, though his heart beat high, "mysphere henceforth is very different from yours; you need have no fear ofme.""God bless you, whatever is your sphere! you are good, and I am sure youwill be happy!" she cried with tears in her eyes, giving him her hand ashe put her into her carriage; but then she added, "will you send someone to call Beatrice, little Beatrice, who came with me? No, don't goyourself, pray don't go--I would not give you so much trouble for theworld!"Edgar did not feel sure whether he was most inclined to burst into rudelaughter, or to go aside to the nearest corner and dry his glisteningeyes.CHAPTER XIX.Schemes and Speculations.Edgar went home in the evening, feeling a degree of agitation which hehad scarcely given himself credit for being capable of. He had been onso low a level of feeling all these years, that he believed himself tohave grown duller and less capable of emotion, though he could notexplain to himself how it should be so. But now the stormwinds had begunto blow, and the tide to rise. The mere sight of Lady Augusta was enoughto have brought back a crowd of sensations and recollections, and therehad lately been so many other touches upon the past to heighten theeffect of this broad gleam of light. Even the curious recognition ofhim, and the apparently foolish enmity against the Ardens, which theyoung lady at Tottenham's had shown, had something to do with theferment of contending feelings in which he found himself. Hate them! no,why should he hate them? But to be thus called back to the recollectionof them, and of all that he had been, had a strangely disturbinginfluence upon his mind. In his aimless wanderings alone over Europe,and in his sudden plunge into a family life quite new to him inScotland, he had believed himself utterly set free from all thetraditions and associations of the former existence, which was indeedmore like a chapter out of a romance than a real episode in life. Takingit at the most, it was nothing but an episode. After years of neglectedyouth, a brief breathless moment of power, independence, and a kind ofgreatness, and then a sharp disruption from them all, and plunge intoobscurity again. Why should that short interval affect him more than allthe long tracts of less highly coloured life, from which it stood outlike a bit of brilliant embroidery on a sombre web? Edgar could nottell; he felt that it did so, but he could not answer to himself why.Mr. Tottenham talked all the way back about one thing and another, aboutMiss Lockwood, and the scandal which had suddenly shocked theestablishment, about little Mary Thornleigh and her brilliant marriage,about the evening entertainment to be given in the shop, which was quiteas important to him. Fortunately for Edgar, his companion was capable ofmonologue, and went on quite pleasantly during their drive without needof anything more than a judicious question or monosyllable of assent."I'll tell you one thing, Earnshaw," he said, "in such undertakings asmine the great thing is never to be discouraged; never allow yourselfto be discouraged; that is my maxim; though I am not always ableto carry it out. I hope I never shall give in to say that becausethings go wrong under my management, or because one meets withdisappointments--therefore things must always go wrong, and nothinggood ever come of it. Of course, look at it from a serious point ofview, concerts and penny readings, and so forth are of no importance.That is what Gussy always tells me. She thinks religion is the onlything; she would like to train my young ladies to find their chiefpleasure in the chapel and the daily service, like her Sisters in theirconvent. I am not against Sisterhoods, Earnshaw; I should not like tosee Gussy go into one, it is true--""Is there any likelihood of that?" Edgar asked with a great start, whichmade the light waggon they were driving in, swerve."Hallo! steady!" cried Mr. Tottenham, "likelihood of it? I don't know.She wished it at one time. You see, Earnshaw, we don't sufficientlyunderstand, seeing how different they are, how much alike women are toourselves. I suppose there comes a time in a girl's life, as well as ina man's, when she wants to be herself, and not merely her father'sdaughter. You may say she should marry in that case; but supposing shedoesn't want to marry, or, put the case, can't marry as she would wish?What can she do? I think myself they overdo the devotional part; but aSisterhood means occupation, a kind of independence, a position of herown--and at the same time protection from all the folly we talk aboutstrong-minded women.""But does it mean all this?" said Edgar surprised, "that is not theordinary view?""My dear fellow, the ordinary view is all nonsense. I say it'sprotection against idiotic talk. The last thing anyone thinks of is tobring forward the strong-minded abuse in respect to a Sisterhood. Butlook here; I know of one, where quite quietly, without any fuss, there'sthe Sister Doctor in full practice, looking after as many children aswould fill a good-sized village. She's never laughed at and called Dr.Mary, M.D.; and there's the Sister Head-Master, with no Governing Bodyto make her life miserable. They don't put forward that view of thesubject. Possibly, for human nature is very queer, they think only ofthe sacrifice, &c.; but I don't wonder, for my part, that it's a greattemptation to a woman. Gussy Thornleigh is twenty-five, too old to beonly her mother's shadow; and if nothing else that she likes comes inher way--"Mr. Tottenham made a pause. Did he mean anything by that pause? PoorEdgar, who felt himself to be a sport to all the wild imaginations thatcan torture a man, sat silent, and felt the blood boiling in his veinsand his heart leaping in his throat. It was as well that his companionstopped talking, for he could not have heard any voice but that of hisown nerves and pulses all throbbing and thrilling. Heaven and earth!might it be possible that this should come about, while he, a man, ableand willing to work, to slave, to turn head and hands to any occupationon the earth, should be hanging on helpless, unable to interfere? Andyet he had but this moment told Gussy's mother that she need not fearhim! A strong impulse came upon him to spring down from the waggon andwalk back to town and tell Lady Augusta to fear everything, that hewould never rest nor let her rest till he won her daughter back to amore smiling life. Alas, of all follies what could be so foolish? he,the tutor, the dependent, without power to help either himself or her.The waggon rushed along the dark country road, making a little circle oflight round its lamps, while the sound of the horses' feet, and the rollof the wheels, enveloped them in a circle of sound, separating, as itwere, this moving speck of light and motion from all the inanimateworld. It would have been as easy to change that dark indifferent spheresuddenly into the wide and soft sympathy of a summer evening, as forEdgar, at this period of his life, to have attempted from this hopelessabstraction, in which he was carried along by others, to have interferedwith another existence and turned its course aside. Not now--if ever,not yet--and, ah, when, if ever? It was a long time before he was ableto speak at all, and his companion, who thus wittingly or unwittingly,threw such firebrands of thought into his disturbed mind was silent too,either respectful of Edgar's feelings, or totally unconscious of them,he could not tell which."May I ask," he inquired, after a long pause, clearing his throat, whichwas parched and dry, "what was meant by 'Helena's sad business?' Whathas become of that Miss Thornleigh?""What has become of her is, that she's married," said Mr. Tottenham. "Avery natural thing, though Helena, I believe, was a little ashamed ofherself for giving into it. She married a man who has nothing but hisbrains to recommend him--no family to speak of, and no money, which,between ourselves, is a good deal worse. He is a professor, and acritic, and that sort of thing--too clever for me, but he suits herbetter than anyone I know. Helena is a totally different sort of person,sure to have her own way, whatever she takes into her head. Now Gussy,on the contrary----""Mr. Tottenham," said Edgar, hoarsely, "for God's sake, don't say anymore.""Ah!" said the other; and then he added, "I beg your pardon, I beg yourpardon," and flourished his whip in the air by way of a diversion. Thismanuvre was so successful that the party had quite enough to think ofto keep their seats, and their heads cool in case of an accident, as thespirited beasts plunged and dashed along the remaining bit of way. "Thatwas as near a spill as I remember," Mr. Tottenham said, as he threw thereins to the groom, when, after a tearing gallop up the avenue, the baysdrew up at the door. He was flushed with the excitement and thestruggle; and whether he had put Edgar to the torture in ignorance, orwith any occult meaning, the sufferer could not discover. The momentarygleam of danger at the end had however done even Edgar good.Lady Mary met them at dinner, smiling and pretty, ready to lend an earto anything interesting that might be said, but full of her own projectsas when they left her. She had carried out her plans with thebusiness-like despatch which women so often excel in, and Edgar, whosemind had been so remorselessly stirred and agitated all day, foundhimself quite established as an active coadjutor in her great scheme atnight."I have sent a little circular to the printers," said Lady Mary, "sayingwhen the German lectures would be resumed. You said Tuesday, I think,Mr. Earnshaw? That is the day that suits us best. Several people havebeen here this afternoon, and a great deal of interest has been excitedabout it; several, indeed, have sent me their names already. Oh, I toldthem you were working half against your will, without thinking very muchof the greatness of the object; indeed, with just a littlecontempt--forgive me, Mr. Earnshaw--for this foolish fancy of womentrying to improve their minds.""No, only for the infinitely odd fancy of thinking I can help in theprocess," said Edgar, dragging himself, as it were, within this newcircle of fantastic light. His own miseries and excitements, heaven helphim, were fantastic enough; but how real they looked by the side of thistheoretical distress! or so at least the young man thought. I cannottell with what half-laughing surprise, when his mind was at ease--buthalf-irritated dismay when he was troubled--he looked at this lady,infinitely more experienced in men and society and serious life thanhimself, who proposed to improve her mind by means of his Germanlessons. Was she laughing at him and the world? or was it a mere fashionof the time which she had taken up? or, most wonderful of all, was shesincere and believing in all this? He really thought she was, and so didshe, not perceiving the curious misapprehension of things and wordsinvolved. It is common to say that a sense of humour saves us fromexposing ourselves in many ways, yet it is amazing how little even oursense of humour helps us to see our own graver absurdities, though itmay throw the most unclouded illumination upon those of other people."That is a polite way of concealing your sentiments," said Lady Mary;"but never mind, I am not angry. I am so sure of the rightness of thework, and of its eventual success, that I don't mind being laughed at.To enlarge the sphere of ideas ever so little is an advantage worthfighting for.""Very well," said Edgar, "I am proud to be thought capable of enlargingsomebody's sphere. What do lectures on German mean? Before I begin youmust tell me what I have to do.""You must teach them the language, Mr. Earnshaw.""Yes, but where shall we begin? with the alphabet? Must I have agigantic black board to write the letters on?""Oh, not so rudimentary as that; most of the ladies, in fact, know alittle German," said Lady Mary. "I do myself, just enough to talk.""Enough to talk! I don't know any more of English, my native tongue,"said Edgar, "than just enough to talk.""Don't laugh at me, Mr. Earnshaw. I know nothing of the grammar, forinstance. We are never taught grammar. We get a kind of knowledge of alanguage, just to use it, like a tool; but what is the principle of thetool, or how it is put together, or in what way it is related to othertools of the same description, I know no more than Adam did.""She knows a great deal more than I do," said Mr. Tottenham, admiringly."I never could use that sort of tool, as you call it, in my life. Awonderfully convenient thing though when you can do it. I never was muchof a hand at languages; you should learn all that when you are quiteyoung, in the nursery, when it's no trouble--not leave it till you haveto struggle with verbs, and all that sort of thing; not to say that younever can learn a foreign language by book."Mr. Tottenham uttered these sentiments in a comfortable leisurely,dressing-gown and slippers sort of way. He did not give in to theseindulgences in reality, but when he came upstairs to the drawing-room,and stretched himself in his great chair by the fire, and felt theluxurious warmth steal through him, after the chill of the drive and theexcitement of its conclusion, he felt that inward sense of ease andcomfort which nerves a man to utter daring maxims and lay down the lawfrom a genial height of good-humour and content."Tom!" cried Lady Mary, with impatience; and then she laughed, andadded, "barbarian! don't throw down all my arguments in your sleepy way.If there is anything of what you call chivalry left in the world, youmen, who are really educated and whom people have taken pains with,ought to do your best to help us who are not educated at all.""O! that is the state of the case? Am I so very well educated? I did notknow it," said Mr. Tottenham, "but you need not compel us to followDogberry's maxim, and produce our education when there's no need forsuch vanities. I have pledged you to come to the shop, Mary, onWednesday week. They think a great deal of securing my lady. They aregoing to give the trial scene from Pickwick, which is threadbare enough,but suits this sort of business, and there's a performance of Watson'son the cornet, and a duet, and some part songs, and so forth. I daresayit will bore you. This affair of Miss Lockwood's is very troublesome,"Mr. Tottenham continued, sitting upright in his chair, and knitting hisbrows; "everything was working so well, and a real desire to improveshowing itself among the people. These very girls, a fortnight since,were as much interested in the glacier theory, and as much delightedwith the snow photographs as it was possible to be; but the moment aprivate question comes in, everything else goes to the wall.""I suppose," said Edgar, "the fact is that we are more interested abouteach other, on the whole, than in any abstract question, howeverelevating.""Why, that is as much as to say that everything must give place togossip," said Lady Mary, severely, "a doctrine I will never give in to.""And, by the way," said Mr. Tottenham, sinking back into dreamy ease,"that reminds me of your sister's great news. What sort of a family isit? I remember young Granton well enough, a good-looking boy in theGuards, exactly like all the others. Little Mary is, how old?Twenty-one? How those children go on growing. It is the first goodmarriage, so to speak, in the family. I am glad Augusta is to have thesalve of a coronet after all her troubles.""What a mixture of metaphors!" cried Lady Mary, "the salve of acoronet!""That comes of my superior education, my dear," said Mr. Tottenham. "Shedoesn't deny it's a comfort to her. Her eyes, poor soul, had a look ofsatisfaction in them. And she has had anxiety enough of all kinds.""We need not discuss Augusta's affairs, Tom," said Lady Mary, with aglance at Edgar, so carefully veiled that the aroused and exciting statein which he was, made him perceive it at once. She gave her husband amuch more distinct warning glance; but he, good man, either did not, orwould not see it."What, not such a happy incident as this?" said Mr. Tottenham; "thechances are we shall hear of nothing else for some time to come. It willbe in the papers, and all your correspondents will send youcongratulations. After all, as Earnshaw says, people are more interestedabout each other than about any abstract question. I should not wondereven, if, as one nail knocks out another, little Mary's great marriagemay banish the scandal about Miss Lockwood from the mind of the shop."Lady Mary for some seconds yielded to an impulse quite unusual to her."What can the shop possibly have to do--" she began, hastily, "with theThornleigh affairs?" she added, in a subdued tone. "If it was our ownlittle Molly, indeed, whom they all know--""My dear Mary, they interest themselves in all your alliances," said Mr.Tottenham, "and you forget that Gussy is as well known among them as youare. Besides, as Earnshaw says--Don't go, Earnshaw; the night is young,and I am unusually disposed for talk.""So one can see," said Lady Mary, under her breath, with as strong aninclination to whip her husband as could have been felt by the mostuncultivated of womankind. "Come and look at my prospectus and thecourse of studies we are arranging for this winter, Mr. Earnshaw. Someof the girls might be stirred up to go in for the Cambridgeexaminations, I am sure. I want you so much to come to the village withme, and be introduced to a few of them. There is really a great deal ofintelligence among them; uneducated intelligence, alas! but under goodguidance, and with the help which all my friends are so kindly willingto give--""But please remember," cried Edgar, struggling for a moment on the edgeof the whirlpool, "that I cannot undertake to direct intelligence. I canteach German if you like--though probably the first German governessthat came to hand would do it a great deal better.""Not so, indeed; the Germans are, perhaps, better trained in the theoryof education than we are; but no woman I have ever met had educationenough herself to be competent to teach in a thoroughly effective way,"cried Lady Mary, mounting her steed triumphantly. Edgar sat down humblyby her, almost forgetting, in his sense of the comical position whichfate had placed him in, the daily increasing embarrassments which filledhis path. All the Universities put together could scarcely have made upas much enthusiasm for education as shone in Lady Mary's pretty eyes,and poured from her lips in floods of eloquence. Mr. Tottenham, wholeaned back in his chair abstractedly, and pondered his plans for theperfection of the faulty and troublesome little society in the shop,took but little notice, being sufficiently occupied with views of hisown; but Edgar felt his own position as a superior being, andrepresentative of the highest education, so comical, that it was all hecould do to keep his gravity. To guide the eager uneducatedintelligence, to discipline the untrained thought, nay, to teach womento think, in whose hands he, poor fellow, felt himself as a baby, wasabout the most ludicrous suggestion, he felt, that could have been madeto him. But nothing could exceed the good faith and earnestness withwhich Lady Mary expounded her plans, and described the results she hopedfor. This was much safer than the talk about little Mary Thornleigh'smarriage--or the unexplainable reasons which kept Gussy Thornleigh frommarrying at all--or any other of those interesting personal problemswhich were more exciting to the mind, and much less easily discussed.CHAPTER XX.The Village.The next afternoon was appointed by Lady Mary as the time at which Edgarshould accompany her to Harbour Green, and be made acquainted with atleast a portion of his future pupils. As I have said, this was a safesort of resource, and he could not but feel that a compassionateunderstanding of his probable feelings, and difficulties of a moreintimate kind, had something to do with Lady Mary's effort to enlist himso promptly and thoroughly in the service of her scheme. Both husbandand wife, however, in this curious house were so thoroughly intent upontheir philanthropical schemes, that it was probably mere supererogationto add a more delicate unexpressed motive to the all-sufficingenthusiasm which carried them forward. Shortly, however, before the hourappointed, a little twisted note was brought to him, postponing till thenext day the proposed visit to the village, and Edgar was left tohimself to pursue his own studies on Phil's behalf, whose education hefelt was quite enough responsibility for one so little trained in theart of conveying instruction as he was. Phil had already favoured himwith one of those engrossing and devoted attachments which are sopleasant, yet sometimes so fatiguing to the object. He followed Edgarabout wherever he went, watched whatever he did with devout admiration,and copied him in such minute matters as were easily practicable, withthe blindest adoration. The persistence with which he quoted Mr.Earnshaw had already become the joke of the house, and with a devotionwhich was somewhat embarrassing he gave Edgar his company continually,hanging about him wherever he was. As Edgar read Lady Mary's note whichthe boy brought to him, Phil volunteered explanations."I know why mamma wrote you that note," he said, "it's because AuntAugusta is there. I heard them saying--"Never mind what you heard them saying," said Edgar; and then he yieldedto a movement of nature. "Was your aunt alone, Phil?" he asked--thengrew crimson, feeling his weakness."How red your face is, Mr. Earnshaw, are you angry? No, I don't thinkshe was alone; some of the girls were with her. Mamma said she wasengaged to you, and they made her give it up.""Naturally," said Edgar, "any day will do for me. What do you say now,Phil, as I am free for the afternoon, to a long walk?""Hurrah!" cried the boy, "I wanted so much to go up to the gamekeeper's,up through the woods to see the last lot of puppies. Do you mindwalking that way? Oh, thanks, awfully! I am so much obliged to AuntAugusta for stopping mamma.""Come along then," said Edgar. He was glad to turn his back on thehouse, though he could not but look back as he left, wondering whether,at any moment at any door or window, the face might appear which he hadnot seen for so long--the face of his little love, whom he had onceloved but lightly, yet which seemed to fix itself more vividly in hisrecollection every day. He could not sit still and permit himself tothink that possibly she was in the same house with him, within reach,that he might hear at any moment the sound of her voice. No, rather,since he had given his voluntary promise to her mother, and since he wasso far separated from her by circumstances, rather hurry out of thehouse and turn his back upon a possibility which raised such a tumult inhis heart. He breathed more freely when he was out of doors, in the dampwintry woods, with Phil, who kept close by his side, carrying on amonologue very different in subject, but not so different in characterfrom his father's steady strain of talk. There is a certain charm inthese wintry woods, the wet greenness of the banks, the mournfulstillness of the atmosphere, the crackle of here and there a droppingbranch, the slow sailing through the air now and then of a leaf, fallingyellow and stiff from the top of a bough. Edgar liked the covert and thecompanionship of trees, which were denuded like himself of all that hadmade life brave and fair. The oaks and beeches, stiffening in theirfaded russet and yellow, stood against the deep green of the pine andfirs, like forlorn old beauties in rustling court dresses of a worn-outfashion; the great elms and spare tall poplars spread their intricatelacework of branches against the sky; far in the west the sun was stillshining, giving a deep background of red and gold to the crowded groupsof dry boughs. The rustle of some little woodland animal warmly furredamong the fallen leaves and decaying husks, the crackling of that branchwhich always breaks somewhere in the silence, the trickle of water,betraying itself by the treacherous greenness of the mossy grass--thesewere all the sounds about, except their own footsteps, and the clearsomewhat shrill voice of the boy, talking with cheerful din againsttime, and almost making up for the want of the birds, so much did hischeerful aimless chatter resemble their sweet confusion of song andspeech, the ordinary language of the woods."I could hit that squirrel as easy as look at him. I bet you a shillingI could! only just look here, cocking his shining eye at us, the cheekylittle brute! Here goes!""Don't," said Edgar, "how should you like it if some Brobdingnagianbeing took a shot at you? What do you think, Phil--were those ladiesgoing to stay?""Those ladies?" cried Phil in amazement, for indeed they were dragged inwithout rhyme or reason in the middle of the woods and of their walk."Do you mean Aunt Augusta and the girls? Oh, is that all? No, I don'tsuppose so. Should you mind? They're jolly enough you know, after all,not bad sort of girls, as girls go.""I am glad you give so good an account of them," said Edgar, amused inspite of himself."Oh, not half bad sort of girls! nicer a great deal than the ones fromthe Green, who come up sometimes. But, I say, Myra Witherington's anexception. She is fun; you should see her do old Jones, or the Rector;how you would laugh! Once I saw her do papa. I don't think she meant it;she just caught his very tone, and the way he turns his head, all in amoment; and then she flushed up like fire and was in such a fright lestwe should notice. Nobody noticed but me.""Your cousins, I suppose, are not so clever as that," said Edgar,humouring the boy, and feeling himself as he did so, the meanest ofhousehold spies."It depends upon which it is. Mary is fun, the one that's going to bemarried," said Phil, "I suppose that will spoil her; and Bee is notbad. She ain't so clever as Mary, but she's not bad. Then there's Gussy,is a great one for telling stories; she's capital when it rains and onecan't get out. She's almost as good as the lady with the funny name inthe Arabian Nights.""Does she often come here?" said Edgar with a tremble in his voice."They say she's going to be a nun," said Phil; "how funny people are! Ican't fancy Cousin Gussy shut up in a convent, can you? I'd rathermarry, like Mary, some great swell; though they are never any fun afterthey're married," Phil added parenthetically with profound gravity. Asfor Edgar he was in no humour to laugh at this precocious wisdom. Hewent straight on, taking the wrong way, and scarcely hearing the shoutsof the boy who called him back. "This is the way to the gamekeeper's,"cried Phil, "Mr. Earnshaw, where were you going? You look as if you hadbeen set thinking and could not see the way."How true it was; he had been set thinking, and he knew no more what roadhe was going than if he had been blindfolded. Years after, the dampgreenness of the fading year, the songless season, the bare branchesagainst the sky, would bring to Edgar's mind the moment when he shot offblankly across the path in the wood at Tottenham's, not knowing and notcaring where he went.Next day Lady Mary fulfilled her promise. She drove him down in her ownpony carriage to the village, and there took him upon a little round ofcalls. They went to the Rectory, and to Mrs. Witherington's, and to theMiss Bakers who were great authorities at Harbour Green. The Rector wasa large heavy old man, with heavy eyes, who had two daughters, and hadcome by degrees (though it was secretly said not without a struggle) tobe very obedient to them. He said, "Ah, yes, I dare say you are right,"to everything Lady Mary said, and gave Edgar a little admonition as tothe seriousness of the work he was undertaking. "Nothing is moreresponsible, or more delicate than instructing youth," said the Rector,"for my part I am not at all sure what it is to come to. The maids knowas much now as their mistresses used to do, and as for the mistresses Ido not know where they are to stop.""But you would not have us condemned to ignorance, papa," said one ofhis daughters."Oh, no, I should not take it upon me to condemn you to anything," saidthe old man with his quavering voice, "I hope only that you may not findyou've gone further than you had any intention of going, before you'vedone."This somewhat vague threat was all he ventured upon in the way ofremonstrance; but he did not give any encouragement, and was greatlyafraid of the whole proceeding as revolutionary, and of Lady Maryherself, as a dangerous and seditious person sowing seeds of rebellion.Mrs. Witherington, to whom they went next, was scarcely moreencouraging. Her house was a large Queen Anne house, red brick, with apediment surmounting a great many rows of twinkling windows. It frontedto the Green, without any grassplot or ornamental shrubs in front; butwith a large well-walled garden behind, out of which rich branches oflilac and laburnum drooped in spring, and many scents enriched the air.The rooms inside were large, but not very lofty, and the twodrawing-rooms occupied the whole breadth of the house, one room lookingto the Green and the other to the garden. There were, or ought to havebeen folding doors between, but these were never used, and the openingwas hung with curtains instead, curtains which were too heavy, andover-weighted the rooms. But otherwise the interior was pretty, withthat homely gracefulness, familiar and friendly, which belongs to thedwelling of a large family where everyone has his, or rather her,habitual concerns and occupations. The front part was the most cheerful,the back the finest. There a great mirror was over the mantelpiece, buthere the late Colonel's swords, crossed, held the place of honour. Thevisitors entered through this plainer room, which acted as ante-chamberto the other, and where Mrs. Witherington was discovered, as in a sceneat the theatre, seated at a writing table with a pile of tradesmen'sbooks before her. She was a tall spare woman, having much more theaspect which is associated with the opprobrious epithet, old maid, thanthat which traditionally ought to belong to the mother of ninechildren--all except the four daughters who remained at home--out andabout in the world. She had three sons who were scattered in thedifferent corners of the earth, and two daughters married, one of whomwas in India, and the other a consul's wife in Spain. The young ladiesat home were the youngest of the family, and were, the two marrieddaughters said to each other when they met, which was very seldom, "verydifferently brought up from what we were, and allowed a great deal toomuch of their own way." Neither of these ladies could understand whatmamma could be thinking of to indulge those girls so; but Mrs.Witherington was by no means an over-indulgent person by nature, and Ithink she must have made up her mind that to indulge the vagaries ofthe girls was safest on the whole and most conducive to domestic peace.Fortunately each of these young women had a "way" of her own, exceptMyra, the youngest, who was the funny one, whom Phil and most boysadmired. The others were--Sissy, who was understood to have a suspendedlove affair, suspended in consequence of the poverty of her lover, fromwhich she derived both pain and pleasure, so to speak; for her sisters,not to speak of the other young ladies of the Green, undoubtedly lookedup to her in consequence, and gave her a much more important place intheir little world than would have been hers by nature; and Marian, whowas the musical sister, who played "anything" at sight, and was good forany amount of accompaniments, and made an excellent second in a duet;and Emma, who was the useful one of the family, and possessed thehandsome little sewing-machine in the corner, at which she executedyards upon yards of stitching every day, and made and mended for theestablishment. Sissy, in addition to having a love affair, drew; so thatthese three sisters were all well defined, and distinct. Only Myra wasgood for nothing in particular. She was the youngest, long the baby, thepet of the rest, who had never quite realized the fact that she was nolonger a child. Myra was saucy and clever, and rather impertinent, andconsidered a wit in her own family. Indeed they all had been accustomedto laugh at Myra's jokes, almost as long as they could recollect, andthere is nothing that establishes the reputation of a wit like this.Mrs. Witherington was alone in the ante-room, as I have said, when LadyMary entered, followed by Edgar. She rose somewhat stiffly to meet hervisitors, for she too being of the old school disapproved of Lady Mary,who was emphatically of the new school, and a leader of all innovations;though from the fact of being Lady Mary, she was judged more lenientlythan a less distinguished revolutionary would have been. Mrs.Witherington made her greetings sufficiently loud to call the attentionof all the daughters, who came in a little crowd, each rising from hercorner to hail the great lady. One of them drew the cosiest chair nearthe fire for her, another gave her an embroidered hand-screen to shieldher face from its glow, and the third hung about her in silentadmiration, eagerly looking for some similar service to render. Myrafollowed last of all, rushing audibly downstairs, and bursting into theroom with eager exclamations of pleasure."I saw the pony-carriage at the Rectory gate, and I hoped you werecoming here," cried Myra; who stopped short suddenly, however, andblushed and laughed at sight of the stranger whom she had not perceived."This is Mr. Earnshaw, Myra," said Lady Mary, "whom I told you of--whois going to be so good as to teach us. I am taking him to see some ofthe ladies whom he is to help to educate.""Please don't convey a false impression," said Edgar. "You are all ahundred times better educated than I am. I don't make any suchpretensions.""We are not educated at all," said Sissy Witherington, folding herhands, with a soft sigh. She said it because Lady Mary said it, andbecause soft sighs were the natural expression of a young heartblighted; but I don't think she would have liked to hear the samesentiment from any one else."Indeed, I think it is extremely disagreeable of you all to say so,"said Mrs. Witherington, "and a reflection on your parents, who did thevery best they could for you. I am sure your education, which youdespise so, cost quite as much, at least for the last year or two, asthe boys' did. I beg your pardon, Lady Mary--but I do think it is alittle hard upon the older people, all these fine ideas that are beingput into the girls' heads.""But, dear Mrs. Witherington, how could you help it?" said the rebelchief. "The very idea of educating women is a modern invention; nobodyso much as thought of it in the last generation. Women have never beeneducated. My mother thought exactly the same as you do. There wasabsolutely no education for women in her day.""Well," said Mrs. Witherington, more erect than ever, "I had an ideaonce that I myself was an educated person, and I daresay so had thecountess--till my children taught me better.""I declare it is hard on mamma," cried Myra; "the only one among us whocan write a decent hand, or do anything that's useful.""Of course nobody means that," said Lady Mary. "What I say is that everygeneration ought to improve and make progress, if there is to be anyamelioration in the world at all; and as, fortunately, there has sprungup in our day an increased perception of the advantages of education--"Here Emma's sewing-machine came to a little knot, and there was a sharpclick, and the thread broke. "Oh, that comes of talking!" said Emma, asshe set herself to pull out the ravelled thread and set it right again.She was not accustomed to take much share in the conversation, and thiswas her sole contribution to it while the visitors remained."Well, a sewing-machine is a wonderful invention," said Mrs.Witherington; "don't you think so, Mr. Earnshaw? Not that I like thework much myself. It is always coarse and rough on the wrong side, andyou can't use it for fine things, such as baby's things, for instance;but certainly the number of tucks and flounces that you can allowyourself, knowing that the machine will do dozens in a day, isextraordinary. And in a house where there are so many girls!--Emma doesa great deal more with her machine, I am sure, than ever Penelope did,who was one of your classical friends, Lady Mary.""And she can undo her work still more quickly," cried Myra, with anoutburst of laughter, "as it's only chain-stitch. What a pity Penelopedid not know of it.""But then the question is," said Sissy, "whether we are so very muchthe better for having more tucks and flounces. (By the way, no one wearstucks now, mamma.) The good of a sewing machine is that it leaves onemuch more time for improving one's mind.""In my day," said Mrs. Witherington, going on with her private argument,"we had our things all made of fine linen, instead of the cotton youwear now, and trimmed with real lace instead of the cheap imitationtrash that everybody has. We had not so much ornament, but what therewas, was good. My wedding things were all trimmed with real Mechlinthat broad--""That must have been very charming," said Lady Mary; "but in themeantime we must settle about our work. Mr. Earnshaw is willing to giveus an hour on Tuesdays. Should you all come? You must not undertake it,if it will interfere with other work.""Oh yes, I want to know German better," said Sissy. "It would be verynice to be able to speak a little, especially if mamma goes abroad nextsummer as she promises. To know a language pretty well is so veryuseful."Lady Mary made a little gesture of despair with her pretty hands. "Oh,my dear girls," she said, "how are you ever to be thoroughly educated ifyou go on thinking only of what's useful, and to speak a little Germanwhen you go abroad? What is wanted is to make you think--to train yourminds into good methods of work--to improve you altogether mentally, andgive you the exactness of properly cultivated intellects; just thething that we women never have."Myra was the only one who had courage enough to reply, which she didwith such a good hearty ringing peal of laughter as betrayed Edgar outof the gravity becoming the situation. Myra thought Lady Mary's addressthe best joke in the world.CHAPTER XXI.Wisdom and Foolishness."It is astonishing," said Lady Mary, mournfully, "how entirely one ismisunderstood in all one's deeper meanings--even by those one has, so tospeak, trained one's self.""Yes," said Edgar, hesitating, with the modesty that became his humblepretensions; "but, after all, to desire a piece of knowledge because itis useful, is not an unworthy sentiment.""Oh, no, not at all an unworthy sentiment; indeed, very right in itsway; but totally subversive," said Lady Mary, sadly, "of the highestprinciple of education, which aims at thorough cultivation of the mindrather than at conferring certain commonplace matter-of-factacquirements. Considered in that point of view, professional educationwould be the highest, which I don't think it is. Unless education isprized for itself, as a discipline of the mind, and not merely asteaching us some things we don't know, we can never reach the highestlevel; and that truth, alas!" Lady Mary sighed, still more sadly, withall the disappointment of a baffled reformer, "women have not even begunto perceive. You laugh, Mr. Earnshaw, but, for my part, I cannotlaugh."Edgar made the best apology he could for his untimely merriment. He wasvery much inclined to adopt the primitive Adamic argument, and declarethat it was Myra's fault; but either high principle, or terror of LadyMary (I think the latter) intervened, and he refrained from thuscommitting himself. They walked along the sunny side of the Greentogether, the ponies having been sent home on account of the cold. Itwas a pretty place, like a village of romance, a succession of irregularhouses surrounding a large triangular green, which was very green, andvery well kept, and almost entirely appropriated to the gentry, thoughnow and then a ragged donkey of the lower classes would graze peaceablyin a corner, to the great advantage, pictorially, of the scene. Some ofthe houses were, like Mrs. Witherington's, of Queen Anne's time, notantique, but pleasantly old-fashioned and characteristic; others werewhite cottages, half hid in shrubberies. In one, which was very red, andvery close upon the road, and had its rows of windows still more crowdedthan the others--a thin house, only one room in depth, with a verybrightly polished brass knocker, and very white steps--there were signsof confusion which caught Lady Mary's eye. She explained to Edgar thatit was the doctor's house, that he was going away, which was not muchloss, as he was an old-fashioned man of the old school, and did not keeppace with the times; and that she trusted the new man, who was comingfrom Scotland, would be better. Edgar listened politely, without payingmuch attention, for, in his ignorance, he did not feel much interest inthe new doctor."I must ask Miss Annetta about him," said Lady Mary, as she led the wayinto a house which turned only its gable to the Green, and possessed acarriage drive and a wilderness of lofty shrubs. The cottage itself wasdamp and weedy, and rather dark, with blinds and curtains half drawnover the little windows, and a sort of dim religious light, green intone, and very limited in degree, pervading the place. When Edgar's eyesbecame accustomed to it, he saw that the little drawing-room wasplastered over with corner cupboards, and velvet-covered shelves, andbrackets, laden with old china and other curious things. The room was socrowded with these ornaments, and with old furniture, that it wasscarcely possible to move without displacing something--a drawback whichwas all the more apparent, as both the Miss Bakers were large persons,many sizes too big for their house. They were not a well-matched pair.The eldest was a harsh-featured woman, looking fully forty-five, andcalling herself so, with a total disregard to the feelings of MissAnnetta, who, all the world knew, was but two years younger. Miss Bakerwas clever, and the other was silly; but yet Miss Annetta was the mostcalculated to attract the attention of the sympathetic spectator, whocould either laugh at her, or weep over her, as his nature prompted. Shehad no remnant of youth in the foolish face that had once been prettyenough; but her entire development, mental and moral, seemed to havebeen arrested when she was about seventeen, at the age when croquet (ifcroquet existed--I am afraid it did not exist at so early a period) andnew patterns for worsted work, and crochet, were the furthest limits ofher desires. Poor soul! to look at her, she was forty-three, biensonns, but to listen to her soft little voice and its prattle, she wasseventeen, not a day more. This curious fossilised girl was left toEdgar's share in the heat of the conversation, which immediately ensuedbetween Lady Mary and Miss Baker--who sympathised deeply on theeducational question, and had a great deal to say to each other.After Edgar had been introduced as being "so good as to be disposed tohelp" in the great work, he was for the moment forgotten, while the twoladies talked of committees and schemes of lectures, and a great manythings which he felt to be quite above his humble intelligence. MissAnnetta was exactly in the same position. The talk was a great deal tooold and too serious for her. She sat silent for a minute or two, feelingsomewhat coy of addressing that wonder and mystery, "a gentleman,"giving him little looks, half-saucy, half-timid, and betraying aninclination to go off into giggles of laughter, which filled Edgar withthe gravest surprise. Finally, she made a bold step, and addressed him,giving the curls which she wore on each side of her face a little shakeand toss of conscious attractiveness before she began."You have not been long in the neighbourhood, Mr. Earnshaw? Do say youlike it. Dear Lady Mary makes Tottenham so charming, so charming! Itis such an acquisition having her. Have you had nice skating lately? Ihear some of the young ladies from the Green have been at the pond. Ihave not gone yet myself, for I don't skate, though everybody doesnow-a-days. They tell me I should learn directly if I only had thecourage to try; but I am such a little coward, I really daren't venture.Of course you will laugh at me; but I dare not. I really haven't thecourage.""I am not at all surprised that you have not the courage," said Edgar,looking at her smiling face, and much disturbed in his mind as to whatto say. "One must make up one's mind to a good many tumbles; which areall very well for boys and girls--""Oh, I shouldn't like that," cried Miss Annetta; "children, as you say,don't mind. What a pity you did not come in the summer, Mr. Earnshaw. Itis such a sociable neighbourhood. We had a garden party somewhere, atleast twice a week, and they are such nice things for bringing youngpeople together--don't you think so? Better than evening parties; youcan see so much more of people, going at four or five o'clock--and ifyou're intimate, staying for high tea and a little music after. It is adelightful way of spending the day. There is nothing can take the sameplace in winter. To be sure if a girl is bold and knows how toskate--but I really daren't try, I haven't the courage;--and you don'tgive me much encouragement, Mr. Earnshaw, it must be allowed."Edgar looked on in dismay while Miss Annetta shook her curls at him, andgiggled as she had done when she was pretty and seventeen, justtwenty-six years ago. What could he say? He was trying to find somethingpolite and pleasant with which to carry on the conversation, when LadyMary suddenly turned from her grave interview with the elder sister, andinterfered for his salvation."Miss Annetta," said Lady Mary, suddenly, "I am sure I can getinformation from you about the doctor. Has he gone? and has the new onecome? and who is he? I hope he is not a mere stupid countrypractitioner. I saw a great commotion at the house.""Oh, poor Mrs. Franks," said Miss Annetta, "they were just preparing togo; but she, poor thing, though I don't like to speak of such thingsbefore gentlemen, went and had a baby this morning. It has put them allout so dreadfully! and she had nothing ready, not so much as a littlecap. Just like her, you will say; and of course they can't go away nowfor ever so long.""Poor soul," said Lady Mary, "I must send and ask if we can doanything.""Indeed, I think it wicked to encourage such people," said Miss Baker."How dare she go on having babies, knowing she can't afford it? I haveno pity for such a woman. Of course she brings it all on herself; and ifshe were the only one to suffer, I shouldn't mind. But just fancy awoman of my age, subject to bronchitis, left to the tender mercies ofher ninny of a husband, probably for six weeks longer, just the worsttime of the year--not to speak of Annetta, who is a perfect martyr torheumatism.""Oh, Jane!" exclaimed Miss Annetta, feebly."Though I think it's gout," said Miss Baker. "When gout is in a family,I believe it never lets you go much beyond forty without entering anappearance; which is my great reason for hoping I shall escapescot-free, seeing I'm forty-five.""You must not believe all my sister says; she is so fond of her fun,"said Miss Annetta, in an aside to Edgar. "Oh, I have heard a great dealabout the new doctor, Lady Mary. He is quite young, and very handsomeand nice, people say. He is coming straight from Scotland, so I supposehe must be very clever, for so many new medical things are found outthere. I hear he has dark hair and eyes, and tall, and a very nicemanner.""Well I suppose these are interesting details," said Lady Mary; "but Ishould have liked to know a little more of his qualifications, Iconfess.""And he has a charming sister, a widow, who keeps his house; so that hewill be able to ask people, which a bachelor never is, except men, andthey don't count as society;" cried Miss Annetta, continuing withbreathless haste her report; for if Lady Mary had a fault, it was thatshe was too ready to interrupt uninteresting speeches. "The Franks areso poor, and they have so many children, they never were any good, noteven for a garden party; but you must not think from what I say that Idon't love children, Mr. Earnshaw. I adore them! When are Phil andlittle Mary coming for a romp, and to see all our curiosities? I do feelso much at home with them, Lady Mary, you can't think. Jane there sayswe are three romps all together, and she doesn't know which is theworst.""They will be delighted to come," said Lady Mary, rising."Oh, but I suppose I must ask permission of Mr. Earnshaw now?" said MissAnnetta. "If you will come too, you will see that your charge does notget into mischief, Mr. Earnshaw, and I am sure you will be quite anaddition. You are not one of the stern tutors that frighten poor littlethings like me.""Indeed I must carry Mr. Earnshaw off. We have no time to spare," saidLady Mary. "Little fool!" she cried, severely, as soon as they had leftthe cottage. "I hope you don't mind her impertinent chatter? I am surenothing could be further from my intention than to subject you to anysuch disagreeable comment.""Disagreeable! to call me what I am, Phil's tutor?" said Edgar. "Why,what a mean-spirited wretch you must think me. To accept a post, and beashamed of the name of it--""But, Mr. Earnshaw, you know that is not how we think. We consider youonly as a friend--and take it as the greatest kindness you can do us."Then Lady Mary, with a flush of generous sentiment, took a warm littlehand out of her muff, and gave it to Edgar, who was a great deal moretouched by the amende than he had been hurt by Miss Annetta's innocentassault."Thanks," he said, with moisture in his eyes, "so much the better forme, and so much the less reason for being ashamed of my post. If yousnubbed me, I might have some excuse perhaps for making a fool ofmyself.""Mr. Earnshaw!" said Lady Mary again, but this time with hesitation, andalmost timidity. "I wonder if you will think I mean to snub you--if Isay something which I am almost bound to say?""Say it!" said Edgar, smiling. He felt in a moment that he knew what wascoming, and looked into her tremulous countenance with all the superiorcalm of a man prepared for pain, and prescient of what was to come."You will not be angry? Oh, Mr. Earnshaw! if you only knew how I fret atsuch restrictions--how I wish we could put aside mercenaryconsiderations, and acknowledge ourselves all to be equal, as I am surewe are by nature!""I don't think we are equal by nature," said Edgar; "but never mind theabstract question. I promise not even to be wounded. And I think I knowwhat you are going to say.""It is just this," said Lady Mary, hurriedly, "Forgive me! The youngThornleighs, Mr. Earnshaw, have always been very much with us. I am fondof them, and so is Mr. Tottenham, and they are always coming and going.It would be ungenerous to you as well as unkind to them, if we were tosend them away because you are here."Edgar did no more than bow in assent. A certain sense of personaldignity, quite new to him, kept him from doing more."It would be thoroughly ungenerous to you," said Lady Mary, warmly, "andcontrary to the perfect trust we feel--both my husband and I--in you,our friend.""Just one word, Lady Mary," said Edgar, "and pardon me if it seemsharsh. Why did you not think of this before? I came here in a mist, notknowing very well what was to happen to me; but you knew the whole,both my side and the other. I need not say send me away, which is themost natural thing to do, for you were aware of all the circumstancesthe other day when you brought me here. Of course, at any moment, I amready to go.""That is not quite generous," said Lady Mary, with an appealing look,"of course we knew, and trusted you as we trust you now--fully. But, Mr.Earnshaw, forgive me! I promised to Augusta to say just one word.""I have already said to Lady Augusta all that can be said," said Edgar;"that she need not fear me--that I will not put myself in her way."They had, by this time, reached the avenue, and were walkingunconsciously fast in the roused state of feeling which this interviewhad called forth, between the long level lines of leafless trees, on theedge of the sodden, bright green wintry grass, which tempted the feetwith its mossy softness. It was afternoon, and the long slanting linesof sunshine lighted up, but scarcely had the better of, the creepingshadows which bided their time in every corner. Lady Mary put out herhand again suddenly, with an excitement which she did not seem able tocontrol, and laid it on Edgar's arm."Mr. Earnshaw!" she said, the tears coming to her eyes. "It is not foryou. Augusta, like myself, trusts you entirely; it is not you.""What then?" said Edgar, suddenly stopping short, and facing her."Mr. Earnshaw! Oh! how can I put into words the strange service--thething beyond words, which Augusta thinks she can trust you enough to askfor. Oh! Mr. Earnshaw, see how absolute is our faith in you! It is notyou she fears. It is the impetuosity--it is the----it is her ownchild."Edgar stood still, and did not speak--how could he? In his life he hadhad enough to chill him one way or another; now, all at once, thereseemed to burst forth a fountain of warmth and life within him--in hisvery heart. The water came to his eyes. If he had been alone I believeit would have overflowed, so poignant was the touch of this sudden,scarcely comprehensible happiness. "Ah!" he cried, summing up in thatlittle syllable, as is done so often, worlds of sudden understanding, ofemotion inexpressible in words; and so stood gazing at the unluckyemissary, who had put things inconceivable, things unbelievable, all atonce into his throbbing brain."Oh, God forgive me!" cried Lady Mary, with a devoutness quite unusualto her. "What have I done--what have I done?""Look here," said Edgar, feeling a strange difficulty of articulation,and with a consciousness that, instead of being eloquent, as he ought tohave been in the circumstances, his words were homely, almost rude; "Sofar as I am myself concerned, nothing will make me swerve from my word.Lady Augusta need have no fear for me; but if--" and here he paused, "ifthe happiness of another were any way involved. It is not mysupposition, pardon me, it is yours. If----then I will be bound by noword, no promise, nothing but--her will whatever it is. I am ready tobalk myself, to give up the desire of my heart, to say never a word, sofar as I am concerned. But her I will not balk; it is not my place.Her will she shall have if I can get it for her--at any risk, with anypains! Lady Mary, bid me go, or take the consequences; this is all Iwill say.""Oh, Mr. Earnshaw!" cried Lady Mary, in a burst of injudicious sympathy."Oh, Edgar! now I understand them;" and with that, this very foolish,very clever, little woman sat down upon the stump of a tree, and criedwith all her heart. She was totally taken by surprise. She had believedhim to be so good, so ready to obliterate himself, that she halfdespised him through all her generous compassion and liking. I think itis Mr. Charles Reade who describes, somewhat coarsely perhaps, but verypowerfully, the woman's surprise at discovering herself to be, for thefirst time, face to face with a male of her own species. The surprise, Ibelieve, is common to both sexes, and as much when love is out of thequestion as when it is deeply involved. It is one of the mostpenetrating of mental sensations--a sudden revelation. Lady Mary feltthis as she sat down on the stump of the tree, and called Edgar Earnshawby his Christian name, and cried, suddenly abandoning her colours,giving up her cause, owning herself utterly conquered. It was a greatdeal to be accomplished by so few words, and Edgar himself was soentirely moved and shaken by what had occurred, that he was not halfsensible of his own success. All he knew was that Lady Mary felt forhim, understood him; and this gave him comfort, when he suddenly droppeddown after the exaltation of his sudden transport into a sadness whichwas its natural consequence. Lady Mary fell too, out of her suddenenthusiasm into a sense of absolute foolishness and the indiscreetest ofsympathetic ebullitions, and picked herself up and went meekly alongthe avenue by Edgar's side, trying to talk about the children, andraking up nursery stories of Phil's cleverness to tell him, in what shewould herself have thought the very imbecility of motherhood. Poor LadyMary! she had the additional misery of thinking that Edgar perceived herutter downfall and change of sides--which he, poor fellow, with hisheart jumping in his throat, was far too much agitated to do.But when they came to the great door, and were about to separate, she"thought it her duty" to leave him with a final word of counsel, "Mr.Earnshaw," she said, almost timidly, "you saw that I was carried away bymy feelings--for I feel for you, however I may be obliged to side withmy sister in what she thinks to be best. You will forget all I have beenso foolish as to say--and keep to what you said to her, won't you? Don'tlet me have done harm instead of good.""I will keep to what I said to her, religiously; she has my word," saidEdgar, "but don't think I can ever forget what you have said to me.""Mr. Earnshaw, it was in confidence.""In closest, dearest confidence," he said, "but not to beforgotten--never to be forgotten; that is not possible. It will be wiserto tell Lady Augusta what I have said; and remember, dear Lady Mary,you, who have been so good to me, that, at a moment's notice, at a word,at a look, I am ready to go away.""Not if I can help it," she said, half crying again, holding out herhand; and in sight of the biggest of the powdered footmen, and of theporter, and of one of the under-gardeners, all looking on inconsternation, he kissed it, absolutely indifferent to what any onemight say. To be sure it was only a little glove he kissed, warm out ofher muff.CHAPTER XXII.The Opposite Camp.The Thornleigh family, or at least the feminine portion of it, was, ashas been indicated to the reader, in town--though it was still veryearly in the year--for the purpose of looking after little Mary'strousseau, as her wedding was to take place at Easter. Lady Augusta'sfamily numbered eight altogether--five girls and three boys; and if Icould tell you half the trouble she had gone through with them, youwould no longer wonder at the wrinkles on her forehead. Her girls hadbeen as troublesome as her boys, which seldom happens, and that wassaying a great deal. Harry, the eldest son, was a prodigal, constantlyin debt and in trouble; John, the second, who, it was hoped, would havedistinguished himself by his brains, had been plucked for his degree;and the regiment of which Reginald, the youngest son, was an ornament,had been sent off to India, contrary to all prognostications. As for thedaughters, though the youngest was nineteen, only one was married--aterrible thought for an anxious mother, as anxious to do her duty byher children as Lady Augusta was--and that one!The eldest was Ada, who, when her lover, only a poor clergyman at thebest, died of typhus fever, caught in his work, never would look atanother man, but retired meekly into old maidenhood. The second, Helena,was the clever one of the family. She had more brains than all the restput together, everybody said, and so indeed she herself thought--morethan she knew what to do with. If that head could only have been put onher brother John's shoulders, what a blessing to everyone concerned!for, alas! all the good her brains did her, was to betray her into amarriage with a very clever and very learned professor, painfullysuperior to everybody else, but altogether out of "her own class." Thethird was Gussy, who had been always Lady Augusta's most dearly beloved,and who, three years ago, had been all but betrothed to the best matchin the county--young Edgar Arden; but when Edgar was ruined, anddisappeared, as it were, off the face of the earth, Gussy, instead ofabandoning him as a sensible girl should have done, clung with theobstinacy which distinguished the Thornleighs, to the very recollectionof him--which, as he was still living and marriageable, though no matchat all, was a fanaticism much less manageable than Ada's. For Ada, ifshe insisted upon considering herself a widow, was at all events quitesubmissive in other matters, and content to be her mother's right handat home; but Gussy, who had by no means given up her personalpossibilities of happiness, and whose hopes were still alive, had beenvery restless, and worried her family with many vagaries. Schemes andcrotchets ran, I suppose, in the noble blood which Lady Augusta hadtransmitted to her daughters. It showed itself in different ways in thesisters: Helena's ways had been all intellectual, but Gussy, who wasbenevolent and religious, was more difficult to deal with. Themelancholy seclusion, which to an English mind is the firstcharacteristic of a convent, has little to do with the busy beehive of amodern sisterhood; and a young woman connected with such an institutionhas claims made upon her which are wonderfully embarrassing to afashionable mother. Helena, in her wildest days, when she had all sortsof committees going on, could be taken to her meetings and lectures inthe carriage, like a Christian, and could be sent for when thesesances were over; but Gussy had to trudge off on foot to all sorts ofplaces in her long black cloak, and to visit houses in which fever, andevery kind of evil, physical and moral, abounded; and was not to beshaken by any remonstrances. Indeed, the parents had been glad tocompromise and consent to any amount of Associateship, so as to keep offthe dreaded possibility of a determination on Gussy's part to enter theSisterhood for good and all. I do not think that Gussy herself everthreatened this, though she thought of it sometimes as her bestalternative, if--; but there was still an if, a living and strongperadventure in her mind. Other good-natured friends, however, stronglypressed the possibility on Lady Augusta's mind; they did all they couldto persuade the anxious mother to take forcible steps in the matter, andconstrain Gussy, on her obedience, to give up her objectionablecharities and devotions. Fortunately Lady Augusta did not belong to thatclass of women who take pleasure in worrying their children for theirgood. She shook her head when her pretty daughter, still as pretty as inher first season, went out in her black cloak, and the hideous bonnet,which the mother would not allow to herself was "becoming,"notwithstanding its intrinsic hideousness. She moaned over the dirt, thedisease, the evil smells and sights which her child was about toencounter, and about the risk of infection to which she would exposeherself."Who can tell what you may bring back with you, Gussy?--fever, or onedoes not know what," Lady Augusta said, piteously. "It is so differentwith our poor people at home, whom we all know.""I will shut myself up in my room, mamma; or I will go to the House,when there is anything infectious about; but I cannot give up my work,"said Gussy, filial, but determined."Oh, work, child! what do you mean by work?" cried Lady Augusta, drivento her wits' end. "Home is surely better than the 'House,' as you callit, and I am sure Ada and I find plenty to do at home. Why cannot you doas we do?""Perhaps because Ada and you do it all," said Gussy, unmoved by thatdespairing appeal which the old is always making to the new. Why cannotyou do as we do?Poor Lady Augusta! It was she who had to give in, not her daughter. Andyou may easily understand, dear reader, how such a good mother wasaffected by the break-down of all her elder hopes--Ada, Helena, Gussy.Her three eldest children--all failures! What a heart-breaking thoughtit was to a woman of fashion, surrounded by contemporaries who hadmarried their daughters well, and whom no man could reproach asnegligent of their highest duties! She would wake sometimes in themiddle of the night, and ask herself was it her fault? Had she putfoolish notions into the heads of the girls? Certainly on the Thornleighside there were no "views" nor "crotchets;" and Lady Augusta was awarethat she herself had accomplished her own fate, not altogether becauseshe preferred it, and had, perhaps, smothered personal predilections,which her children showed no inclination to smother. "Why cannot they doas I did?" she would say in her heart, with a sigh.But now at last a moment had come, in which her natural cares wererewarded. When Lord Granton proposed for Mary, her mother had almostcried with joy. For the first time here was a satisfactory--a completelysatisfactory conclusion. So unexceptionable a young man, such a title,such estates, and a family which any girl might be proud to enter! Thedelight was all the sweeter from being so long deferred, so sadlymissed. She forgave Helena her bad match, and Gussy and Ada their nomatches at all, in the exhilaration of this happy moment. All her littlegrievances and grudges vanished in the sudden flood of sunshine. She wasreconciled to all the world, even to Helena's husband, the Professor,over whom, too, a heavenly radiance would be flung, when he wasbrother-in-law to a marquis. Poor Lady Augusta! In the full height ofher exhilaration she betook herself to Tottenham's to send the good newsto her sister, feeling that now at least, perhaps for the first time,there was no trouble to lessen her happiness; and there she encountered,without any warning, Edgar! Heaven help her! a man still moreobjectionable, because more hopelessly penniless than Helena'sprofessor, a man without a name, without a shilling, without aconnection! but whom Gussy, her favourite daughter, was ready, she knew,to follow to the end of the world. When she drove out to the ruralTottenham's after this, to tell her sister the story of Mary'sengagement, is it wonderful that her agitated mind should have pouredforth all its mingled strain of joy, tribulation, content, and alarm?The wholly joyful part of her budget was soon swallowed up in therevelation of her fears about Gussy, and in the reproaches she could notquite restrain. Why had her sister so added to her burdens, by thisinjudicious, this uncalled-for interference in Edgar's fortunes? He wasnot so friendless, Lady Augusta protested, half indignant, half weeping,that they, of all the world, should have rushed into the breach, andtaken him up--bringing him even into their house, where he could notfail to see Gussy one time or other. And then the anxious mother cried,and told her sister that she had no confidence in Gussy. In Edgar shehad every confidence; he had promised never to thrust himself into herway; but Gussy had made no such promise, and her mother did not evendare to speak to her on the subject, knowing that she would be met byunanswerable arguments. Thus the two ladies, talking over the wholematter, fell into a not unnatural snare, and resolved to confide inEdgar, and trust to him to keep Gussy, as well as himself, right--notforeseeing how that confidence would change to him the whole aspect ofaffairs. When Ada heard how far her mother's revelations had gone, andof the step Lady Mary was commissioned to take, she did not give it herapproval, as Lady Augusta had hoped, but looked very grave, and doubtedmuch the wisdom of the proceeding. "He promised never to stand in myway," Lady Augusta said, much depressed by her privy-councillor'sdisapproval. "But he did not promise for Gussy--what right would he haveto undertake for Gussy?" said Ada, shaking her head. It was an ideawhich had not entered her mother's mind, for Lady Augusta had that kindof confidence in Edgar, as of a man born to set everything right, whichwomen, especially when surrounded by practical difficulties, are soready to place in an ideal man. He had never objected to her commandshitherto; why should he now? Nevertheless, when Ada disappeared, LadyAugusta began to quake lest she should have done more harm than good."We must try to get something for him to do," she said, faltering,"something abroad. Notwithstanding all those absurd new arrangements,people of influence can still command situations abroad, I hope, if theychoose to take the trouble. I shall speak to Lord Millboard, Ada; and Iam sure Granton, dear fellow, would take any trouble, if he knew howimportant it was.""Because he is happy himself, to prevent poor Gussy from being happy?"said Ada. "Oh, I am not saying anything against it, mamma. I suppose itwill have to be.""Of course it will have to be," said her mother, "you are all veryunkind--you girls. Not one of you has exerted herself as I had a rightto expect. Do you think that I thought of nothing but pleasing myselfwhen I married? And who has lost the most in losing Edgar? Well, Gussy,you may say, in one way; but I too. What a help he would have been tome! so kind and so understanding. Oh, Ada! if you knew how much it goesagainst my heart to shut him out. But it must be; what would yourfather--what would every one say?"To this, Ada could return but little answer, except to murmur somethingabout "leaving it in the hands of Providence," which was not soconsolatory to Lady Augusta as it was meant to be."It is all very well to say, leave it to Providence!" cried that muchtried mother, "if you had lived as long as I have, Ada, you would havefound that all the most inconvenient things that happen in the worldare said to be brought about by Providence--especially in the way ofmarriages. No, we must take precautions; Gussy must not go nearTottenham's while he is there; and I'll tell you what I will do. Harryis at home doing nothing particular, and probably quarrelling with yourpoor papa, who has so much to vex him. I have just been wondering howthey could possibly get on with all of us away. I will write and tellhim to offer himself to your aunt Mary for a visit.""Harry! what good will Harry do?" asked Ada, wondering."Well, my dear, at least he will be on the spot," said Lady Augusta; andshe breathed a long sigh, as if a weight had been taken off her mind.Any stop-gap, however imperfect, which takes, or seems to take, aresponsibility off the mind, is enough to give a sense of relief to oneso overborne by many businesses as Lady Augusta was. "And now, my dear,let us look over Mary's patterns," she said, drawing a chair towardsAda's table, on which a mass of samples, of linen, silk, muslin, andevery other fabric, known to human ingenuity, were lying, ticketed andarranged in packets. This was a little bit of pure enjoyment, whichrefreshed the anxious mother in the midst of all her cares.I need not tell what commotion was made in the household when the newscrept out and stole secretly from one girl to another, that Edgar hadcome back. Mary and Beatrice put their curly heads together over it, andthe result was a communication to the young Granton, which effectuallyfortified him against making himself a tool of any of poor LadyAugusta's schemings to get rid of the danger. These two were thechildren of the house, and the elder sisters paid but little attentionto their innocent conspiracies. The elders were more interestingpersonages than little Mary and Bee, though Mary was a predestinedmarchioness, and there was no knowing what Bee might come to in the wayof matrimonial elevation. There are people, no doubt, who will think theold maid of the family its least interesting member; but you, dearunknown friend, my gentle reader, are not of that complexion; and theremay be others who will feel that Ada's obscure life was a poor enoughthing to settle down to, after all the hopes and all the disappointmentsof youth, both of which are more exciting and sustaining than the simplemonotony of such a commonplace existence. I am not sure, however, for myown part, whether Ada's soft self-renunciation never expressed in words,and her constant readiness in trouble, and the numberless frocks shemade for her poor children--and even her mother's meetings, though thefamily laughed at them--were half so bewildering an anti-climax to thehigh aspirations of youth as was Helena's Professor, and the somewhathumdrum, if highly intellectual routine into which she had dropped withhim. Helena, herself now and then, had a confused and giddyconsciousness that ministering to a man's comforts, who was not at all ademi-god, and attending lectures at the Royal Society was a very odd andsudden downfall from all her dreams of social amelioration and "a greatwork;" but fortunately she was happy, a thing which deadens the moralperception. Ada was happy, too, in her different way; but Gussy was nothappy. She had not the tranquil soul of her elder sister, nor thatcurious mixture of sense and talent, and self-confidence and absence ofhumour which made Helena what she was. She had not "given up," as invarious ways both of them had done. She was dissatisfied, for life asyet had lost none of its possibilities, neither by fulfilment norrenunciation. All clouds might yet be cleared away from her sky, andwhat she considered perfect happiness might yet be waiting for hersomewhere. This remnant of possibility that the soul may still have allit craves, ought, you might think, to have kept Gussy's heart alive, andgiven her a secret support; but it was in fact a very fire ofrestlessness within her. The first step towards attaining the secondaryhappinesses of life, is to have given up and recognised as impossiblethe primary and greater happiness. Gussy had been compelled to occupyherself closely, in order to save herself from becoming discontented,morbid, sour, and miserable, by reason of this sense within her, thateverything might yet come right."Why should you say it was injudicious?" she said to her sister, whenthey at length discussed the subject, "why should not they help him,since he wants it, because of the chance of meeting me? I heard whatmamma said as I came in. If he does meet me, I dare say he has forgottenall about me by this time, or at least remembers me only as a friend.It would be hard indeed if any ghost of me, after all these years, wereto come in his way.""And you," said her sister, "could you meet him as a friend whom youremembered? Would that be all?"Gussy's lip quivered in spite of herself. "I hope I could do--whateverwas necessary," she said proudly. But in the midst of uttering these twoor three words, a sudden tear fell unexpectedly out of her eye andbetrayed her. "How silly!" she said, dashing it away; "you forget I didsee him. Oh, Ada, fancy travelling with him all those hours, and neversaying a word! It was as if we were in two different worlds--likelooking into another existence, and seeing those whom one has lost,without any power to communicate with them.""Ah! but we are not permitted to do even that," said Ada; "do you thinkhe did not recognise you? Not at all? That is so strange to me."Gussy shook her head. "I don't think he did; but you must remember," shesaid humbly, "that he never was what you might call so very much in lovewith me. He liked me; he was even fond of me--but not exactly in love.It is different--I always felt that, even when you all made so sure. Andwhat he thinks of me now, I don't know. If I saw him once, I should beable to tell you; but I shall try not to see him. It is best I shouldnot see him," said Gussy very low, "best in every way.""My poor child!" said Ada; but she did not contradict her, as her sisteralmost hoped; and Gussy went away immediately after, with her heartfull, to put on her black cloak and close bonnet, and to go forth intosome very unsavoury region indeed, where a serene Sister, so smiling andcheery that you might be certain her mind was taken up by no possiblehappiness, was hard at work. Gussy had some very disagreeable workallotted to her which gave her full occupation till it was time toreturn to "the world," and as long as she was thus engaged she was ableto forget all about herself and Edgar, and everything else in the otherexistence. Thus Rag Fair was good for her, and gave her a certain amountof strength with which to return to Berkeley Square.But the reader will perceive that if Edgar's mind was disturbed by whathe had heard, a similar, if less violent commotion had been raised, bythe mere intimation of his return, in the opposite camp, where everymember of the family instinctively felt the danger, though the young andthe romantic among them welcomed it as rather an advantage than a peril.Gussy went about her ordinary work, whether in "the world" or out of it,with a soft perpetual tremor, feeling that at any moment, round anycorner, she might meet him with whom her youthful thoughts had wanderedall these years. I will not say that she was not somewhat anxious anduncertain as to the effect which this long interval might have had uponEdgar's mind; for women seldom have a very strong faith, unassisted byevidence, in the fidelity of a long absent lover; but she had no senseof having given love unsought, or shame in her own secret devotion. Sheknew that if Edgar had remained rich and prosperous she would have beenhis wife long ere now, and this gave to Gussy's maiden love that sweetlegitimacy and pride of duty which is so much to a woman, and emboldensher to give without shame, and with all her heart.In the meantime, however, Lady Augusta took that other precautionarymeasure which had suddenly occurred to her, to Ada's great surprise andconsternation, and sent private orders to her son, Harry--who was atthat moment under a cloud, and doing his best to act the part of a goodson to a very irritable father who had just paid his debts for him, andwas taking them out in abuse of every description at Thornleigh, whilethe mother and sisters were in town. I don't believe she had the leastnotion what good Harry could do; but it relieved him from a very tryingordeal, and the young man jumped at it, though Ada shook her head. "Hewill be on the spot at least, my dear," said Lady Augusta, allunconscious of slang. She explained to her husband that the Tottenhamshad taken one of their fancies to Mr. Earnshaw, whom they had all onceknown so well as Edgar Arden, and that she thought it would be well thatone of the family should be there to keep an eye upon him, lest he andGussy should meet. "For you know, Gussy has not been the same since thataffair," wrote the careful mother. Mr. Thornleigh, who had a more thanordinary contempt at this moment for Harry's capabilities, wrote her arather rude letter in reply, telling her that she was a fool indeed ifshe trusted in anything her hopeful son could do; but nevertheless, hemade no objection to the visit. Thus it will be seen how emphaticallytheir own doing was all the confusion that followed this momentous step,which the Thornleighs all combined in their ignorance to make Harrytake--and which he accepted as he would have accepted any change, atthat moment; not having the least idea of what was wanted of him, anymore than of what fate had in store for him. Lady Augusta went on morecalmly with her preparations for little Mary's grand wedding when shehad thus, to her own satisfaction, secured a representative atTottenham's. And Ada studied the patterns indefatigably, and gave themother the very best advice as to which was most suitable; and Gussy hada perfect carnival of work, and spent almost all her time in RagFair--with occasional expeditions to the shop, where Mr. Tottenham hadestablished a chapel, chiefly to please her, and where one of theclergymen attached to the Charity-House kept up daily service. This wasmuch more dangerous, had Lady Augusta been aware of the fact, than therural Tottenham's, where Harry was set to be sentinel without knowingit.And thus the first cold lingering days of spring--spring only in name,with all winter's cold, and less than winter's comfort, draggedthemselves along. Only to Lady Augusta, who was busy with thetrousseau, and little Mary, who was making love, the days were not longenough for all that had to be put into them; though the others were of adifferent mind.CHAPTER I.
Intoxication.
There is, perhaps, no such crisis in the life of a man as that which
occurs when, for the first time, he feels the welfare and happiness of
another to be involved in his own. A woman is seldom so entirely
detached from ordinary ties of nature as to make this discovery
suddenly, or even to be in the position when such a discovery is
possible. So long as you have but yourself to think of, you may easily
be pardoned for thinking very little of that self, for being careless of
its advantage, and letting favourable opportunities slip through your
fingers; but suppose you find out in a moment, without warning, that
your interests are another's interests, that to push your own fortune is
to push some one else's fortune, much dearer to you than yourself; and
that, in short, you are no longer you at all, but the active member of
a double personality--is as startling a sensation as can well be
conceived. This was the idea which Edgar had received into his mind for
the first time, and it was not wonderful that it excited, nay,
intoxicated him, almost beyond his power of self-control. I say for the
first time, though he had been on the eve of asking Gussy Thornleigh to
marry him three years before, and had therefore realised, or thought he
realised, what it would be to enter into such a relationship; but in
those days Edgar was rich, and petted by the world, and his bride would
have been only a delight and honour the more, not anything calling for
sacrifice or effort on his part. He could have given her everything she
desired in the world, without losing a night's rest, or disturbing a
single habit. Now the case was very different. The new-born pride which
had made him, to his own surprise, so reluctant to apply to anyone for
employment, and so little satisfied to dance attendance on Lord
Newmarch, died at that single blow.
Dance attendance on Lord Newmarch! ask anybody, everybody for work! Yes,
to be sure he would, and never think twice; for had he not now her to
think of? A glow of exhilaration came over him. He had been careless,
indifferent, sluggish, so long as it was himself only that had to be
thought of. Thinking of himself did not suit Edgar; he got sick of the
subject, and detested himself, and felt a hundred pricks of annoyance at
the thought of being a suitor and applicant for patronage, bearing the
scorns of office, and wanting as "patient merit" in a great man's
ante-room. But now! what did he care for those petty annoyances? Why
should he object, like a pettish child, to ask for what he wanted? It
was for her. He became himself again the moment that the strange and
penetrating sweetness of this suggestion (which he declared to himself
was incredible, yet believed with all his heart) stole into his soul.
This had been what he wanted all along. To have some one to work for,
some one to give him an object in life.
Lady Mary had not a notion what she was doing when she set light to the
fire which was all ready for that touch--ready to blaze up, and carry
with it her own schemes as well as her sister's precautions. I suppose
it was by reason of the fundamental difference between man and woman,
that neither of these ladies divined how their hint would act upon
Edgar. They thought his virtue (for which they half despised him--for
women always have a secret sympathy for the selfish ardour of men in all
questions of love) was so great that he might be trusted to restrain
even Gussy herself in her "impetuosity," as they called it, without
considering that the young man was disposed to make a goddess of Gussy,
to take her will for law, and compass heaven and earth to procure her a
gratification. Gussy, though she held herself justified in her
unswerving attachment to Edgar, by the fact that, had it not been for
his misfortune, she would long ago have been his wife, would,
notwithstanding this consolation, have died of shame had she known how
entirely her secret had been betrayed. But the betrayal was as a new
life to Edgar. His heart rose with all its natural buoyancy; he seemed
to himself to spurn his lowliness, his inactivity, his depressed and
dejected state from him. That evening he beguiled his hosts into
numberless discussions, out of sheer lightness of heart. He laughed at
Lady Mary about her educational mania, boldly putting forth its comic
side, and begging to know whether German lectures and the use of the
globes were so much better, as means of education, than life itself,
with all its many perplexities and questions, its hard lessons, its
experiences, which no one can escape.
"If a demigod from the sixth form were to come down and seat himself on
a bench in a dame's school," cried Edgar, "why, to be sure, he might
learn something; but what would you think of the wisdom of the
proceeding?"
"I am not a demigod from the sixth form," said Lady Mary.
"Pardon me, but you are. You have been among the regnant class all your
life, which of itself is an enormous cultivation. You have lived
familiarly with people who guide the nation; you have spoken with most
of those who are known to be worth speaking to, in England at least; and
you have had a good share of the problems of life submitted to you. Mr.
Tottenham's whole career, for instance, which he says you decided--"
"What is that?" said Mr. Tottenham, looking up. "Whatever it is, what
you say is quite true. I don't know if it's anything much worth calling
a career; but, such as it is, it's all her doing. You're right there."
"I am backed up by indisputable testimony," said Edgar, laughing; "and
in the face of all this, you can come and tell me that you want to
educate your mind by means of the feeblest of lectures! Lady Mary, are
you laughing at us? or are the dry lessons of grammar and such like
scaffolding, really of more use in educating the mind than the far
higher lessons of life?"
"How you set yourself to discourage me," cried Lady Mary, half angry,
half laughing. "That is not what you mean, Mr. Earnshaw. You mean that
it is hopeless to train women to the accuracy, the exactness of thought
which men are trained to. I understand you, though you put it so much
more prettily."
"I am afraid I don't know what accuracy means," said Edgar, "and
exactness of thought suggests only Lord Newmarch to me; and Heaven
deliver us from prigs, male and female! If you find, however, that the
mass of young university men are so accurate, so exact, so accomplished,
so trained to think well and clearly, then I envy you your eyes and
perceptions--for to me they have a very different appearance; many of
them, I should say, never think at all, and know a good deal less than
Phil does, of whom I am the unworthy instructor--save the mark!" he
added, with a laugh. "On the whole, honours have showered on my head; I
have had greatness thrust upon me like Malvolio; not only to instruct
Phil, but to help to educate Lady Mary Tottenham! What a frightful
impostor I should feel myself if all this was my doing, and not yours."
Lady Mary laughed too, but not without a little flush of offence. It
even crossed her mind to wonder whether the young man had taken more
wine than usual? for there was an exhilaration, a boldness, an lan
about him which she had never perceived before. She looked at him with
mingled suspicion and indignation--but caught such a glance from his
eyes, which were full of a new warmth, life, and meaning, that Lady Mary
dropped hers, confused and confounded, not knowing what to make of it.
Had the porter, and the footman, and the under-gardener, who had seen
Edgar kiss Lady Mary's hand, been present at that moment, they would
certainly have drawn conclusions very unfavourable to Mr. Tottenham's
peace of mind. But that unsuspecting personage sat engaged in his own
occupation, and took no notice. He was turning over some papers which he
had brought back with him from Tottenham's that very day.
"When you two have done sparring," he said--"Time will wait for no man,
and here we are within a few days of the entertainment at the shop.
Earnshaw, I wish you would go in with me on Wednesday, and help me to
help them in their arrangements. I have asked a few people for the first
time, and it will be amusing to see the fine ladies, our customers,
making themselves agreeable to my 'assistants.' By-the-way, that affair
of Miss Lockwood gives me a great deal of uneasiness. I don't like to
send her away. She seemed disposed to confide in you, my dear fellow--"
"I will go and secure her confidence," said Edgar, with that gay
readiness for everything which Lady Mary, with such amaze, had remarked
already in his tone. Up to this moment he had wanted confidence in
himself, and carried into everything the insouciance of a man who
takes up with friendliness the interests of others, but has none of his
own. All this was changed. He was another man, liberated somehow from
chains which she had never realised until now, when she saw they were
broken. Could her conversation with him to-day have anything to do with
it? Lady Mary was a very clever woman, but she groped in vain in the
dark for some insight into the mind of this young man, who had seemed to
her so simple. And the less she understood him, the more she respected
Edgar; nay, her respect for him began to increase, from the moment when
she found out that he was not so absolutely virtuous as she had taken
him to be.
Next day, as soon as Phil's lessons were over, Edgar shut himself up,
and, with a flush upon his face, and a certain tremor, which seemed to
him to make his hand and his writing, by some curious paradox, more firm
than usual, began to write letters. He wrote to Lord Newmarch, he wrote
to one or two others whom he had known in his moment of prosperity, with
a boldness and freedom at which he was himself astonished. He recalled
to his old acquaintances, without feeling the least hesitation in doing
so, the story of his past life, about which he had been, up to this
moment, so proudly silent, and appealed to them to find him something to
do. He wrote, not as a humble suitor does, but as one conscious of no
humiliation in asking. The last time he had asked he had been conscious
of humiliation; but every shadow of that self-consciousness had blown
away from him now. He wondered at himself even, while he looked at those
letters closed and directed on his writing-table. What was it that had
taken away from him all sense of dislike to this proceeding, all his old
inclination to let things go as they would? With that curious tremor
which was so full of firmness and force still vibrating through him, he
went out, avoiding Phil, who was lying in wait for him, and who moaned
his absence like a sheep deprived of its lamb--which, I think, was
something like the parental feeling Phil experienced for his tutor--and
set out for a long solitary walk across country, leaping ditches and
stumbling across ploughed fields, by way of exhausting a little his own
superabundant force and energy. Only a day or two since how dreary was
the feeling with which he had left the house, where perhaps, for aught
he knew, Gussy was at the moment thinking, with a sickening at his heart
which seemed to make all nature dim, how he must never see her again,
how he had pledged himself to keep out of the way, never to put himself
consciously where he might have even the dreary satisfaction of a look
at her. The same pledge was upon him still, and Edgar was ready to keep
it to the last letter of his promise; but now it had become a simple
dead letter. There was no more force, no more vital power in it, to keep
the two apart, who had but one strong wish between them. He could keep
it now gaily, knowing that he was in heart emancipated from it. There
was nothing he could not have done on that brilliant wintry afternoon,
when the sun shone upon him as if he had wanted cheering, and every pool
glittered, and the sky warmed and flushed under his gaze with all the
delightful sycophancy of nature for the happy. The dullest afternoon
would have been just the same to Edgar. He was liberated, he was
inspired, he felt himself a strong man, and with his life before him.
Cold winds and dreary skies would have had no effect upon his spirits,
and for this reason, I suppose, everything shone on him and flattered.
To him that hath, shall be given.
He was not to get back, however, without being roused from this beatific
condition to a consciousness of his humanity. As he passed through the
village, chance drew Edgar's eye to the house which Lady Mary had noted
as that of the doctor, and about which Miss Annetta Baker had discoursed
so largely. A cab was at the door, boxes were standing about the steps,
and an animated conversation seemed to be going on between two men, one
an elderly personage without a hat, who stood on the steps with the air
of a man defending his door against an invader, while another and
younger figure, standing in front of the cab, seemed to demand
admission. "The new doctor has arrived before the old one is ready to go
away," Edgar said to himself, amused by the awkwardness of the
situation. He slackened his pace, that the altercation might be over
before he passed, and saw the coach man surlily putting back again the
boxes upon the cab. The old doctor pointed over Edgar's head to a
cottage in the distance, where, he was aware, there was lodgings to be
had; and as Edgar approached, the new doctor, as he supposed the
stranger to be, turned reluctantly away, with a word to some one in the
cab, which also began to turn slowly round to follow him. The stranger
came along the broad sandy road which encircled the Green, towards
Edgar, who, on his side, approached slowly. What was there in this slim
tall figure which filled him with vague reminiscences? He got interested
in spite of himself; was it some one he had known in his better days?
who was it? The same fancy, I suppose, rose in the mind of the
new-comer. When he turned round for the second time, after various
communications with the inmates of the cab, and suddenly perceived
Edgar, who was now within speaking distance, he gave a perceptible
start. Either his reminiscences were less vague, or he was more prepared
for the possibility of such a meeting. He hurried forward, holding out
his hand, while Edgar stood still like one stunned. "Dr. Murray?" he
said, at last, feeling for the moment as if he had been transported back
to Loch Arroch. He was too bewildered to say more.
"You are very much surprised to see me," said Charles Murray, with his
half-frank, half-sidelong aspect; "and it is not wonderful. When we met
last I had no thought of making any move. But circumstances changed, and
a chance threw this in my way. Is it possible that we are so lucky as to
find you a resident here?"
"For the moment," said Edgar; "but indeed I am very much surprised. You
are to be Dr. Frank's successor? It is very odd that you should hit upon
this village of all the world."
"I hope it is a chance not disagreeable to either of us," said the young
doctor, with a glance of the suspicion which was natural to him; "but
circumstances once more seem against us," he added hurriedly, going back
to the annoyance, which was then uppermost. "Here I have to go hunting
through a strange place for lodgings at this hour,--my sister tired by a
long journey. By the way, you have not seen Margaret; she is behind in
the cab; all because the Franks forsooth, cannot go out of their house
when they engaged to do so!"
"But the poor lady, I suppose, could not help it," said Edgar,
"according to what I have heard."
"No, I suppose she couldn't help it--on the whole," he allowed, crossly.
"Cabman, stop a moment--stop, I tell you! Margaret, here is some one you
have often heard of--our cousin, who has been so good to the dear old
granny--Edgar Earnshaw."
Dr. Charles pronounced these last words with a sense of going further
than he had ever gone before, in intimacy with Edgar. He had never
ventured to call his cousin by his Christian name; and even now it was
brought in by a side wind, as it were, and scarcely meant so much as a
direct address. Edgar turned with some curiosity to the cab, to see the
sister whom he had seen waiting at the station for Dr. Murray some
months ago. He expected to see a pretty and graceful young woman; but he
was not prepared for the beauty of the face which looked at him from
the carriage-window with a soft appealing smile, such as turns men's
heads. She was tall, with a slight stoop (though that he could not see)
and wore a hat with a long feather, which drooped with a graceful
undulation somewhat similar, he thought, to the little bow she made him.
She was pale, with very fine, refined features, a large pair of the
softest, most pathetic blue eyes, and that smile which seemed to
supplicate and implore for sympathy. There was much in Margaret's
history which seemed to give special meaning to the plaintive affecting
character of her face; but her face was so by nature, and looked as if
its owner threw herself upon your sympathies, when indeed she had no
thought of anything of the sort. A little girl of six or seven hung upon
her, standing up in the carriage, and leaning closely against her
mother's shoulder, in that clinging inseparable attitude, which,
especially when child and mother are both exceptionally handsome, goes
to the heart of the spectator. Edgar was subjugated at once; he took off
his hat and went reverently to the carriage-door, as if she had been a
saint.
"It is very pleasant that you should be here, and I am very glad to see
you," she said, in soft Scotch accents, in which there was a plaintive,
almost a complaining tone. Edgar found himself immediately voluble in
his regrets as to the annoyance of their uncomfortable reception, and,
ere he knew what he was doing, had volunteered to go with Dr. Charles to
the lodgings, to introduce him, and see whether they were satisfactory.
He could not quite understand why he had done it, and thus associated
himself with a man who did not impress him favourably, as soon as he had
turned from the door of the cab, and lost sight of that beautiful face;
of course he could not help it, he could not have refused his good
offices to any stranger, he said to himself. He went on with his cousin
to the cottage, where the landlady curtseyed most deeply to the
gentleman from Tottenham's, and was doubly anxious to serve people who
were his friends; and before he left he had seen the beautiful
new-comer, her little girl as always standing by her side leaning
against her, seated on a sofa by a comfortable fire, and forgetting or
seeming to forget, her fatigues. Dr. Charles could not smile so sweetly
or look so interesting as his sister; he continued to inveigh against
Dr. Franks, and his rashness in maintaining possession of the house.
"But the poor thing could not help it," said Margaret, in her plaintive
voice, but not without a gleam of fun (if that were possible without
absolute desecration) in her eyes.
"They should not have stayed till the last moment; they should have made
sure that nothing would happen," the doctor said, hurrying in and out,
and filling the little sitting-room with cloaks and wraps, and many
small articles. Margaret made no attempt to help him, but she gave Edgar
a look which seemed to say, "Forgive him! poor fellow, he is worried,
and I am so sorry he has not a good temper." Edgar did not know what to
make of this angelical cousin. He walked away in the darkening, after
he had seen them settled, with a curious feeling, which he could not
explain to himself. Was he guilty of the meanness of being annoyed by
the arrival of these relatives, who were in a position so different from
that of his other friends? Was it possible that so paltry, so miserable
a feeling could enter his mind--or what was it? Edgar could render no
distinct account to himself of the sensation which oppressed him; but as
he walked rapidly up the avenue in the quickly falling darkness, he felt
that something had happened, which, somehow or other, he could not tell
how, was to affect his future life.
CHAPTER II.
A youthful Solomon.
Edgar felt so strong an inclination to say nothing about the sudden
arrival of his cousins, that he thought it best to communicate at once
what had happened. He told his hosts at dinner, describing the brother
and sister, and Margaret's remarkable beauty, which had impressed him
greatly.
"And really you did not know she was so pretty?" Lady Mary said, fixing
a searching look upon him. Instant suspicion flashed up in her mind, a
suspicion natural to womankind, that his evident admiration meant at
least a possibility of something else. And if she had been consistent,
no doubt she would have jumped at this, and felt in it an outlet for all
her difficulties, and the safest of all ways of detaching Edgar from any
chance of influence over her niece; but she was as inconsistent as most
other people, and did not like this easy solution of the difficulty. She
offered promptly to call upon the new-comers; but she did not cease to
question Edgar about them with curiosity, much sharpened by suspicion.
She extracted from him, in full detail, the history of the Murrays, of
Margaret's early widowhood, and the special union which existed between
her and her brother. Harry Thornleigh had arrived at Tottenham's that
day, and the story interested him still more than it did Lady Mary. Poor
Harry was glad enough to get away from his father's sole companionship;
but he did not anticipate very much enjoyment of the kindred seclusion
here. He grasped at Edgar as a drowning man grasps at a rope.
"I say, let's go somewhere and smoke. I have so many things to tell you,
and so many things to ask you," he cried, when Lady Mary had gone to
bed, and Mr. Tottenham, too, had departed to his private retirement, and
Edgar, not knowing, any more than Harry himself did, that young
Thornleigh was set over him as a sentinel, to guard him from all
possibility of mischief, was but too glad to find himself with an
uninstructed bystander, from whom he could have those bare "news"
without consciousness or under-current of meaning, which convey so much
more information than the scrap of enlightenment which well-meaning
friends dole out with more and more sparing hands, in proportion as the
feelings of the hearer are supposed to be more or less concerned. Harry
was not so ignorant as Edgar thought him. He was not bright, but he
flattered himself on being a man of the world, and was far from being
uninterested in Gussy's persistent neglect of all possible
"opportunities." "A girl don't stand out like that without some cause
for it," Harry would have said, sagaciously; but he was too knowing to
let it be perceived that he knew.
"There is a deal of difference up at home now," he said. "I don't mean
my father--but you can't think what changes Arden has made. Do you like
to hear, or don't you like to hear? I'll guide myself accordingly. Very
well, then I'll speak. He's on the right side in politics, you know,
which you never were, and that's a good thing: but he's done everything
you felt yourself bound not to do. Clare don't like it, I don't think.
You should see the lot of new villas and houses. Arden ain't a bit like
Arden; it's a new spick and span Yankee sort of town. I say, what would
the old Squire have thought? but Arthur Arden don't care."
"He is right enough, Harry. He was not bound to respect anyone's
prejudices."
"Well, there was Clare," said Thornleigh. "They may be prejudices, you
know; but I wouldn't spite my wife for money--I don't think. To be sure,
if a man wants it badly that's an excuse; but Arden has plenty of money,
thanks to you. What a softy you were, to be sure, not to say anything
disagreeable! Even if I had had to give up in the end, wouldn't I have
made him pay!"
"Never mind that," said Edgar. "Tell me some more news. He hasn't
changed the house, I suppose, and they are very happy, and that sort of
thing? How is she looking"? It is three years since I left, and one
likes to hear of old friends."
"Happy?" said Harry, "meaning Mrs. Arden? She's gone off dreadfully; oh,
I suppose she's happy enough. You know, old fellow," the young man
continued, with a superior air of wisdom, "I don't pretend to believe in
the old-fashioned idea of living happy ever after. That's bosh! but I
daresay they're just as comfortable as most people. Clare has gone off
frightfully. She's not a bit the girl she was; and of course Arden can't
but see that, and a man can't be always doing the lover."
"Is it so?" cried Edgar, with flashing eyes. He got up unconsciously, as
if he would have rushed to Clare's side on the spot, to defend her from
any neglect. All the old affection surged up in his heart. "My poor
Clare!" he said, "and I cannot do anything for you! Don't think me a
fool, Harry. She's my only sister, though she doesn't belong to me; and
that fellow--What do you mean by gone off? She was always pale."
"Oh, he don't beat her or that sort of thing," said Thornleigh. "She's
safe enough. I wouldn't excite myself, if I were you; Mrs. Arden can
take care of herself; she'll give as good as she gets. Well, you needn't
look so fierce. I don't think, as far as I've heard, that she stood up
like that for you."
"She was very good to me," said Edgar, "better than I deserved, for I
was always a trouble to her, with my different ways of thinking; and the
children," he added, softly, with an ineffable melting of his heart over
Clare's babies, which took him by surprise. "Tell me all you can, Harry.
Think how you should feel if you had not heard of your own people for so
many years."
"I don't know that I should mind much," said honest Harry; "there are
such heaps of them, for one thing; and children ain't much in my way.
There's two little things, I believe--little girls, which riles Arden.
Helena's got a baby, by the way--did you know?--the rummiest little
customer, bald, like its father. Nell was as mad as could be when I said
so. By Jove! what fun it was! with a sort of spectacled look about the
eyes. If that child don't take to lecturing as soon as it can speak,
I'll never trust my judgment again."
Edgar did not feel in a humour to make any response to young
Thornleigh's laughter. He felt himself like an instrument which was
being played upon, struck by one rude touch after another, able to do
nothing but give out sounds of pain or excitement. He could do nothing
to help Clare, nothing to liberate Gussy; and yet Providence had thrust
him into the midst of them without any doing of his, and surrounded him
once more with at least the reflection of their lives. He let Harry
laugh and stop laughing without taking any notice. He began to be
impatient of his own position, and to feel a longing to plunge again
into the unknown, it did not matter where, and get rid of those dear
visions. Excitement brought its natural reaction in a sudden fit of
despondency. If he could do nothing--and it was evident he could do
nothing--would it not be better to save himself the needless pain, the
mingled humiliation and anguish of helplessness? So long as he was here,
he could not but ask, he could not but know. Though the ink was scarcely
dry upon the letters he had been writing, the cry for aid to establish
himself somehow, in an independent position which he had sent forth to
all who could help--a sudden revulsion of feeling struck him, brought
out by his despair and sense of impotence. Far better to go away to
Australia, to New Zealand, to the end of the world, and at least escape
hearing of the troubles he could do nothing to relieve, than to stay
here and know all, and be able to do nothing. An instrument upon which
now one strain of emotion, now another, was beaten out--that was the
true image. Lady Mary had played upon him the other day, eliciting all
sorts of confused sounds, wound up by a sudden strain of rapture; and
now Harry struck the passive cords, and brought forth vaguer murmurs of
fury, groans of impotence, and pain. It would not do. He was not a reed
to be thus piped upon, but a man suffering, crying out in his pain, and
he must make an end of it. Thus he thought, musing moodily, while Harry
laughed over his sister's bald baby. Harry himself was a dumb Memnon,
whom no one had ever woke into sound, and he did not understand anything
about his companion's state of mind.
"Have you come to an end of your questions?" he said. "You ain't so
curious as I expected. Now here goes on my side? First and foremost, in
the name of all that's wonderful, how did you come here?"
Edgar shrugged his shoulders. "You will do me a better service if you
will tell me how to get out of here," he said. "I was a fool to stay. To
tell the truth, I had not woke up to any particular interest in what
became of me. I had only myself to think of; but I can't bear to
remember them all, and have nothing to do with them--that's the truth."
"You must make up your mind to that, old fellow," said Harry, the
philosopher; "few people get just all they want. But you can't go and
run away for that. You shouldn't have run away at the first. It's the
coming back that does it. I know. You thought it was all over and done
with, and that you could begin straight off, without coming across old
things and old faces. I've turned over about as many new leaves, and
made about as many fresh starts as most people, and I can feel for you.
It ain't no manner of use; you can't get done with one set of people and
take up with another; the old ones are always cropping up again," said
Harry, oracularly. "You've got to make up your mind to it. But I must
say," he added, changing his tone, "that of all places in the world for
getting shut of the past, to come here!"
"I was a fool," said Edgar, with his head between his hands. Up to this
moment he had thought of Harry Thornleigh as a somewhat stupid boy. Now
the young man of the world had the better of him. For the first time he
fully realised that he had been foolish in coming here, and had placed
himself in an exceptionally difficult position by his own act, and not
by the action of powers beyond his control, as he thought. In short, he
had allowed himself to be passive, to drift where the current led him,
to do what was suggested, to follow any one that took it upon him to
lead. I suppose it is consistent with the curious vagaries of human
nature that this sudden sense of his impotence to direct his fate should
come just after the warm flush of self-assertion and self-confidence
which had made him feel his own fate to be once more worth thinking of.
Harry, elevated on his calm height of matter-of-fact philosophy, had
never in his life experienced so delightful a sense of capacity to
lecture another, and he did not lose the opportunity.
"Don't be down about it," he said, condescendingly. "Most fellows make
some mistake or other when they come to again after a bad fall. The
brain gets muzzy, you know; and between a stark staring madman like old
Tottenham, and a mature Syren like Aunt Mary, what were you to do? I
don't blame you. And now you've done it, you'll have to stick to it. As
for Clare Arden, I shouldn't vex myself about her. She knew the kind of
fellow she was marrying. Besides, if a man was to put himself out for
all his sisters, good Lord! what a life he'd have. I don't know that
Helena's happy with that professor fellow. If she ain't, it's her own
business; she would have him. And I don't say Clare's unhappy. She's not
the sort of person to go in for domestic bliss, and make a show of
herself. Cheer up, old fellow; things might be a deal worse. And ain't
old Tottenham a joke? But, by-the-way, take my advice; don't do too much
for that little cub of his. He'll make a slave of you, if you don't
mind. Indeed," said Harry, lighting a fresh cigar, "they'll all make a
slave of you. Don't you let my lady get the upper hand. You can always
manage a woman if you take a little trouble, but you must never let her
get the upper hand."
"And how do you manage a woman, oh, Solomon?" said Edgar, laughing, in
spite of himself.
"I've had a deal of experience," said Harry, gravely; "it all depends on
whether you choose to take the trouble. The regular dodge about young
men having their fling, and that sort of thing, does for my mother;
she's simple, poor dear soul. Aunt Mary wants a finer hand. Now you have
the ball at your feet, if you choose to play it; only make a stand upon
your mind, and that sort of thing, and she'll believe you. She wouldn't
believe me if I were to set up for a genius, 'cause why? that's not my
line. Be difficile," said Harry, imposingly, very proud of his French
word; "that's the great thing; and the more high and mighty you are, the
more she'll respect you. That's my advice to you. As for dear old
Tottenham, you can take your choice, anything will do for him; he's the
best old fellow, and the greatest joke in the world."
With this Harry lit his candle and marched off to bed, very well pleased
with himself. He had done all that Lady Augusta had hoped for. So far as
his own family were concerned, he had comported himself like a
precocious Macchiavelli. He had named no names, he had made no
allusions, he had renewed his old friendship as frankly as possible,
without however indulging Edgar in a single excursion into the past. He
had mentioned Helena, who was perfectly safe and proper to be mentioned,
a sign that he talked to his old friend with perfect freedom; but with
the judgment of a Solomon he had gone no further. Not in vain did Harry
flatter himself on being a man of the world. He was fond of Edgar, but
he would have considered his sister's choice of him, in present
circumstances, as too ludicrous to be thought of. And there can be
little doubt that Harry's demeanour had an influence upon Edgar far more
satisfactory for Lady Augusta than her sister's intervention had been.
All the visionary possibilities that had revealed themselves in Lady
Mary's warning, disappeared before the blank suavity of Harry. In that
friendly matter-of-fact discussion of his friend's difficulties, he had
so entirely left out the chief difficulty, so taken it for granted that
nothing of the kind existed, that Edgar felt like a man before whom a
blank wall has suddenly risen, where a moment before there were trees
and gardens. Harry's was the man's point of view, not the woman's. Those
regrets and longings for what might have been, which Lady Mary could not
prevent from influencing her, even when she sincerely wished that the
might have been should never be, were summarily extinguished in Harry's
treatment. Of course the old must crop up, and confront the new, and of
course the complication must be faced and put up with, not run away
from. Such was the young man of the world's philosophy. Edgar sat long
after he was gone, once more feeling himself the instrument on which
every one played, rather than a conscious actor in the imbroglio. The
image got possession of his fanciful brain. Like the thrill of the
chords after the hand that struck them had been withdrawn, he seemed to
himself to keep on vibrating with long thrills of after sensation, even
when the primary excitement was over. But words are helpless to describe
the thousand successive changes of feeling of which the mind is capable
at a great crisis, especially without immediate power to act one way or
another. Edgar, in despair, went and shut himself into the library and
read, without knowing well what he read. The passage of those long
processions of words before his eyes, gave him a certain occupation,
even if they conveyed but little meaning. How easy it would be to do
anything; how difficult it was to bear, and go on, and wait!
All this, perhaps, might be easier to support if life were not so
cruelly ironical. That morning Edgar, who felt his own position
untenable, and whose future seemed to be cut off under his feet--who
felt himself to be standing muffled and invisible between two suffering
women, each with the strongest claim upon him, for whom he could do
nothing--was carried off to assist in getting up an entertainment at Mr.
Tottenham's shop. Entertainments, in the evening--duets, pieces on the
cornet, Trial Scene from Pickwick; and in the morning, lectures, the
improvement of Lady Mary Tottenham's mind, and the grand office of
teaching the young ladies of Harbour Green to think! What a farce it all
seemed! And what an insignificant farce all the lighter external
circumstances of life always seem to the compulsory actors in them, who
have, simultaneously, the tragedy or even genteel comedy of their own
lives going on, and all its most critical threads running through the
larger lighter foolish web which concerns only the outside of man. The
actor who has to act, and the singer who has to sing, and the romancist
who has to go on weaving his romance through all the personal miseries
of their existence, is scarcely more to be pitied than those
unprofessional sufferers who do much the same thing, without making any
claim, or supposing themselves to have any right to our sympathy. Edgar
was even half glad to go, to get himself out of the quiet, and out of
hearing of the broken bits of talk which went on around him; but I do
not think that he was disposed to look with a very favourable eye on the
entertainment at Tottenham's, or even on the benevolent whimsey of the
owner of that enormous shop.
CHAPTER III.
Harry.
Harry Thornleigh was anything but content to be left alone at
Tottenham's. He proposed that he should accompany Edgar and Mr.
Tottenham, but the latter personage, benevolent as he was, had the
faculty of saying No, and declined his nephew's company. Then he
wandered all about the place, looked at the house, inspected the dogs,
strolled about the plantations, everything a poor young man could do to
abridge the time till luncheon. He took Phil with him, and Phil
chattered eternally of Mr. Earnshaw.
"I wish you wouldn't call him by that objectionable name," said Harry.
"It's a capital good name," cried Phil. "I wish you could see their
blazon, in Gwillim. Earnshaw says it ain't his family; but everybody
says he's a great swell in disguise, and I feel sure he is."
"Hallo!" said Harry, idly, "what put that into your head? It's all the
other way, my fine fellow."
"I don't know what you mean by the other way. His name wasn't always
Earnshaw," said Phil, triumphantly. "They've got about half a hundred
quarterings, real old gentry, not upstarts like us."
"That's admirable," said Harry. "I suppose that's what you study all the
time you are shut up together, eh?"
"No, he don't care for heraldry, more's the pity," said Phil. "I can't
get him to take any interest. It's in other ways he's so jolly. I say,
I've made up a coat for us, out of my own head. Listen! First and
fourth, an ellwand argent; second and third, three shawls proper--But
you don't understand, no more than Earnshaw does. I showed it to the
mother, and she boxed my ears."
"Serve you right, you little beggar. I say, Phil, what is there to do in
this old place? I'm very fond of Tottenham's in a general way, but I
never was here in winter before. What are you up to, little 'un? There's
the hounds on Thursday, I know; but Thursday's a long way off. What have
you got for a fellow to do, to-day?"
"Come up to the gamekeeper's and see the puppies," said Phil; "it's
through the woods all the way. Earnshaw went with me the other day.
They're such jolly little mites; and if you don't mind luncheon very
much, we can take a long stretch on to the pond at Hampton, and see how
it looks. It's shallower than our pond here."
"I don't care for a muddy walk, thanks," said Harry, contemplating his
boots, "and I do mind luncheon. Come along, and I'll teach you
billiards, Phil. I suppose there's a billiard table somewhere about."
"Teach me!" cried Phil, with a great many notes of admiration; "why, I
can beat Earnshaw all to sticks!"
"If you mention his name again for an hour, I'll punch your head," cried
Harry, and strolled off dreamily to the billiard-room, Phil following
with critical looks. The boy liked his cousin, but at the same time he
liked to have his say, and did not choose to be snubbed.
"What a thing it is to have nothing to do!" he said, sententiously. "How
often do you yawn of a morning, Harry? We're not allowed to do that.
Earnshaw--"
"You little beggar! didn't I promise to punch your head?" cried Harry;
and they had an amiable struggle at the door of the billiard-room, by
which Phil's satirical tendencies were checked for the moment.
"Ain't you strong, just!" Phil said, after this trial, with additional
respect.
But notwithstanding the attractions of the billiard-table, Harry,
yawning, stalked into luncheon with an agreeable sense of variety. "When
you have nothing else to do, eat," he said, displaying his wisdom in
turn, for the edification of Phil. "That's a great idea; I learned it at
Oxford where it's very useful."
"And not very much else, acknowledge, Harry," said Lady Mary.
"Well, as much as I was wanted to learn. You are very hard upon a
fellow, Aunt Mary. John, I allow, was intended to do some good; but me,
no one expected anything from me--and why should a fellow bother his
brains when he hasn't got any, and doesn't care, and nobody cares for
him? That's what I call unreasonable. I suppose you'll keep poor Phil at
high pressure, till something happens. It ain't right to work the brain
too much at his age."
"What about John?" said Lady Mary, "he has gone back to Oxford and is
working in earnest now, isn't he? Your mother told me--"
"Poor dear old mother, she's so easy taken in, it's a shame. Yes, he's
up at old Christ Church, sure enough; but as for work! when a thing
ain't in a fellow, you can't get it out of him," said Harry oracularly.
"I don't say that that isn't rather hard upon the old folks."
"You are a saucy boy to talk about old folks."
"Well, they ain't young," said Harry calmly. "Poor old souls, I'm often
sorry for them. We haven't turned out as they expected, neither me nor
the rest. Ada an old maid, and Gussy a 'Sister,' which is another name
for an old maid, and Jack ploughed, and me--well, I'm about the best if
you look at it dispassionately. By the way, no, little Mary's the best.
There is one that has done her duty; but Granton has a devil of a temper
though they don't know it. On the whole, I think the people who have no
children are the best off."
"Upon what facts may that wise conclusion rest?" said Lady Mary.
"I have just given you a lot of facts; me, Jack, Ada, Gussy, and you may
add, Helena. Five failures against one success; if that ain't enough to
make life miserable I don't know what is. I am very sorry for the
Governor; my mother takes it easier on the whole, though she makes a
deal more fuss; but it's deuced hard upon him, poor old man. The
Thornleighs don't make such a figure in the county now as they did in
his days; for it stands to reason that eight children, with debts to
pay, &c., takes a good deal out of the spending-money; and of course the
old maids of the family must come upon the estate."
"When you see the real state of the case so plainly," said Lady Mary,
"and express yourself so sensibly--don't you think you might do
something to mend matters, and make your poor father a little happier?"
"Ah, that's different," said Harry, "I've turned over so many new leaves
I don't believe in them now. Besides a fellow gets into a groove and
what is he to do?"
"Phil, if you have finished your lunch, you and Molly may run away and
amuse yourselves," said Lady Mary, feeling that here was an opportunity
for moral influence. The two children withdrew rather unwillingly, for
like all other children they were fond of personal discussions, and
liked to hear the end of everything. Harry laughed as they went away.
"You want to keep Phil out of hearing of my bad example," he said, "and
you are going to persuade me to be good, Aunt Mary; I know all you're
going to say. Don't you know I've had it all said to me a hundred times?
Don't bother yourself to go over the old ground. May I have the honour
of attending your ladyship anywhere this afternoon, or won't you have
me, any more than Mr. Tottenham?"
"Oh, Harry, you're a sad boy," said Lady Mary, shaking her head. She had
thought, perhaps, that she might have put his duty more clearly before
him than any previous monitor had been able to do, for we all have
confidence in our own special powers in this way; but she gave up
judiciously when she saw how her overture was received. "I am going to
the village," she said, "to call upon those new people, Mr. Earnshaw's
cousins."
"Oh, the beauty!" cried Harry with animation, "come along! Sly fellow to
bring her here, where he'll be always on the spot."
"Ah, that was my first idea; but he knew nothing of it. To tell the
truth," said Lady Mary, "I wish it were so; I should be a good deal
easier in my mind, and so would your mother if I could believe he was
thinking seriously of anyone--in his own rank of life."
"Why, I thought you were a democrat, and cared nothing for rank; I
thought you were of the opinion that all men are equal, not to speak of
women--"
"Don't talk nonsense, Harry; an abstract belief, one way or other, has
nothing to do with one's family arrangements. I like Mr. Earnshaw very
much; he is more than my equal, for he is an educated man, and knows
much more than I do, which is my standard of position; but still, at the
same time, I should not like him--in his present circumstances--to enter
my family--"
"Though a few years ago we should all have been very glad of him," said
Harry. "Oh, I agree with you entirely, Aunt Mary. If Gussy is such a
fool she must be stopped, that's all. I'd have no hesitation in locking
her up upon bread and water rather than stand any nonsense. I'd have
done the same by Helena if I'd had my way."
"How odd," said Lady Mary, veering round instantly, and somewhat abashed
to find herself thus supported, "and yet you are young, and might be
supposed to have some sort of sympathy--"
"Not a bit," cried Harry, "I don't mind nonsense; but as soon as it gets
serious I'm serious too. If this fellow, whom you call Earnshaw, has any
notions of that kind I'll show him the difference. Oh, yes, I like him;
but you may like a fellow well enough, and not give him your sister.
Besides, what made him such a fool as to give up everything? He might
have fought it out."
"Harry, you are very worldly--you do not understand generous
sentiments--"
"No, I don't," said Harry stoutly, "what's the good of generous
sentiments if all that they bring you to is tutorizing in a private
family? I'd rather put my generous sentiments in my pocket and keep my
independence. Hallo, here's your pony carriage. Shall you drive, or
shall I?"
Lady Mary was crushed by her nephew's straightforward worldliness. Had
she been perfectly genuine in her own generosity, I have no doubt she
would have metaphorically flown at his throat; but she was subdued by
the consciousness that, much as she liked Edgar, any sort of man with a
good position and secure income would appear to her a preferable husband
for Gussy. This sense of weakness cowed her, for Harry, though he was
stupid intellectually, was more than a match for his aunt in the calm
certainty of his sentiments on this point. He was a man of the world,
disposed to deal coolly with the hearts and engagements of his sisters,
which did not affect him personally, and quite determined as to the
necessary character of any stranger entering his family, which did
affect him.
"I will have no snobs or cads calling me brother-in-law," he said. "No,
he ain't a snob nor a cad; but he's nobody, which is just the same. It's
awfully good of you to visit these other nobodies, his relations. Oh,
yes, I'll go in with you, and see if she's as pretty as he said."
The lodging in which Dr. Murray had established himself and his sister,
so much against his will, was a succession of low-roofed rooms in a
cottage of one story, picturesque with creepers and heavy masses of ivy,
but damp, and somewhat dark. The sitting-room was very dim on this
wintry afternoon. It was a dull day, with grey skies and mist; the two
little windows were half-obscured with waving branches of ivy, and the
glimmer of the fire flickered into the dark corners of the dim green
room. You could scarcely pass from the door to the fireplace without
dragging the red and blue tablecloth off the table, or without stumbling
against the sofa on one side, or the little chiffonier on the other.
When Lady Mary went in, like a queen to visit her subjects, two figures
rose simultaneously to meet her. Margaret had been seated in the recess
of the window to catch the last rays of the afternoon, and she let her
work drop hurriedly out of her fingers, and rose up, undecipherable,
except in outline, against the light. Dr. Charles rose too in the same
way against the firelight. Neither of the four could make each other
out, and the strangers were embarrassed and silent, not knowing who
their visitor was. Lady Mary, however, fortunately was equal to the
occasion. She introduced herself, and mentioned Edgar, and introduced
her nephew, all in a breath. "I am so sorry you should have had so
uncomfortable a reception," she said, "but you must not be angry with
poor Mrs. Franks, for it could not be helped."
"Oh, no, it could not be helped," they both said, in unison, with low
Scotch voices, the accent of which puzzled Lady Mary; and then Margaret
added, still more softly, "I am sorry for her, poor woman, stopped at
such a moment." The voice was very soft, shy, full of self-consciousness
and embarrassment. Harry stood by the window, and looked out, and felt
more bored than ever. He had come to see a beauty, and he saw nothing
but the little grass-plot before the cottage-door, shut in by bushes of
holly and rhododendron. And Lady Mary went on talking in a sort of
professional lady-of-the-manor strain, telling Dr. Murray what he had to
look forward to, and wherein Dr. Franks had been deficient.
"You will find it a very good house, when you can get in to it," she
said, "and a pleasant neighbourhood;" and then in the little pause that
followed these gracious intimations, Edgar's name was introduced, and
the mutual surprise with which his cousins and he had met; while the
brother and sister explained, both together, now one strange soft voice
breaking in, now the other, how much and how little they knew of him,
Harry still stood leaning on the window, waiting, with a little
impatience, till his aunt should have got through her civilities. But
just then the mistress of the cottage appeared, holding in both hands a
homely paraffin lamp, by no means free of smell, which she placed on the
table, suddenly illuminating the dim interior. Harry had to move from
the window while she proceeded to draw down the blinds, and thus of a
sudden, without warning or preparation, he received the electric shock
which had been preparing for him. Margaret had seated herself on the end
of the little sofa close to the table. She had raised her eyes to look
at him, probably with something of the same curiosity which had brought
him to the cottage--Lady Mary's nephew, a person in the best society,
could not be without interest to the new-comers. Margaret looked up at
him with the unconscious look of appeal which never went out of her
beautiful eyes. The young man was, to use his own language, struck "all
of a heap." He thought she was asking something of him. In his hurry and
agitation, he made a step towards her.
"You were asking--" cried Harry, eagerly, affected as he had never been
in his life before. What was it she wanted? He did not stop to say to
himself how beautiful she was. He felt only that she had asked him for
something, and that if it were the moon she wanted, he would try to get
it for her. His sudden movement, and the sound of his voice, startled
Lady Mary too, who could not make out what he meant.
"I did not say anything," said Margaret, in the slightly plaintive voice
which was peculiar to her, with a smile, which seemed to the young man
like thanks for the effort he had made. He took a chair, and drew it to
the table, not knowing what he did. A sudden maze and confusion of mind
came over him, in which he felt as if some quite private intercourse had
gone on between this stranger and himself. She had asked him, he could
not tell for what--and he had thrown his whole soul into the attempt to
get it for her; and she had thanked him. Had this happened really, or
was it only a look, a smile that had done it? The poor boy could not
tell. He drew his chair close to the table to be near her. She was not a
stranger to him; he felt at once that he could say anything to her,
accept anything from her. He was dazed and stunned, yet excited and
exhilarated by her mere look, he could not tell why.
And the talk went on again. Harry said nothing; he sat casting a glance
at her from time to time, eager, hoping she would ask that service from
him once more. Perhaps Margaret was accustomed to produce this effect on
strangers. She went on in her plaintive voice, telling how little she
knew of Edgar, and what he had done for his family, in an even flow of
soft speech, answering all Lady Mary's questions, not looking at the new
worshipper--while Dr. Murray, in his embarrassed way, anxious to make a
good impression, supplemented all his sister said. Margaret was not
embarrassed; she was shy, yet frank; her eyes were cast down generally
as she talked, over the work she held in her hands, but now and then she
raised them to give emphasis to a sentence, looking suddenly full in the
face of the person she was addressing. It was her way. She renewed her
spell thus from moment to moment. Even Lady Mary, though she had all her
wits about her, was impressed and attracted; and as for poor Harry, he
sat drawing his chair closer and closer, trying to put himself so near
as to intercept one of those glances which she raised to Lady Mary's
face.
"Our old mother brought us up," she said. "I cannot tell how good she
was to Charles and me, and what it cost us not to be rich enough to help
her."
"Margaret," said Dr. Charles, "Lady Mary cannot care to hear all this
about you and me."
"Oh, pray go on, I am so much interested," said Lady Mary.
"For we have never been rich, never anything but poor," said Margaret,
suddenly lifting her beautiful eyes, and thus giving double effect to
the acknowledgment; while her brother fretted a little, and moved on his
chair with impatience of her frankness.
"We have been able to make our way," he said, in an under-tone.
"You see, I have always been a drag on him, I and my little girl," she
went on, with a soft sigh, "so that he was not able to help when he
wanted to help. And then Mr. Earnshaw came in, and did all, and more
than all, that Charles could have hoped to do. For this we can never
think too highly of him, never be grateful enough."
"It was what any fellow would have done," interrupted Harry, putting his
head forward. He did not know what he was saying. And Lady Mary,
suddenly looking at him, took fright.
"Thank you so much for telling me this," she said, rising. "I am so glad
to hear another good thing of Mr. Earnshaw who is one of my first
favourites. For his sake you must let me know if there is anything I can
do to make you comfortable. Harry, it is time for us to go; it will be
quite dark in the avenue. Pardon me, Dr. Murray, but I don't know your
sister's name; foolishly, I never thought to ask?"
"Mrs. Smith," said Dr. Charles, as they both got up, filling the little
dark room with their tall figures. Harry did not know how he made his
exit. One moment, it seemed to him he was surrounded with an atmosphere
of light and sadness from those wonderful blue eyes, and the next he was
driving along the darkling road, with the sound of the wheels and the
ponies' hoofs ringing all about him, and unsympathetic laughter breaking
from under Lady Mary's veil by his side.
"Mrs. Smith!" she cried; "what a prodigious anti-climax! It was all I
could do to keep my gravity till I got outside. That wonderful creature
with such eyes, and her pretty plaintive voice. It is too absurd. Mrs.
Smith!"
"You seem to enjoy the joke!" said Harry, stiffly, feeling offended.
"Enjoy the joke! don't you? But it was rather a shock than a joke. What
a pretty woman! what a pretty voice! It reminds me of blue-bells and
birch trees, and all kinds of pleasant things in Burns and Scott. But
Mrs. Smith! And how that lamp smelt! My dear Harry, I wish you would be
a little more cautious, or else give me the reins. I don't want to be
upset in the mud. Mrs. Smith!"
"You seem to be mightily amused," said Harry, more gruff than ever.
"Yes, considerably; but I see you don't share my amusement," said Lady
Mary, still more amused at this sudden outburst of temper, or propriety,
or whatever it might be.
"I always thought you were very sympathetic, Aunt Mary," said the young
man, with a tone of dignified reproof. "It is one of the words you
ladies use to express nothing particular, I suppose? The girls are
always dinning it into my ears."
"And you think I don't come up to my character, Harry?"
"I don't understand your joke, I confess," said Harry, with the loftiest
superiority, drawing up at the great hall door.
CHAPTER IV.
The Education of Women.
Mr. Tottenham came back from town that evening alone. He explained that
Earnshaw had stayed behind on business. "Business partly mine, and
partly his own; he's the best fellow that ever lived," was all the
explanation he gave to his wife; and Lady Mary was unquestionably
curious. They talked a great deal about Edgar at dinner that evening,
and Phil made himself especially objectionable by his questions and his
indignation.
"He hasn't been here so long that he should go away," said Phil. "Don't
he like us, papa? I am sure there is something wrong by your face."
"So am I," said little Molly. "You only look like that when some one has
been naughty. But this time you must have made a mistake. Even you might
make a mistake. To think of Mr. Earnshaw being naughty, like one of us,
is ridiculous."
"Naughty!" cried Phil. "Talk of things you understand, child. I'd like
to know what Earnshaw is supposed to have done," cried the boy, swelling
with indignation and dignity, with tears rising in his eyes.
"I've locked him up in the dark closet in the shop till he will promise
to be good," said the father, with a laugh; "and if you will throw
yourself at my feet, Molly, and promise to bear half of his punishment
for him, I will, perhaps, let him out to-morrow."
Little Molly half rose from her chair. She gave a questioning glance at
her mother before she threw herself into the breach; while Phil,
reddening and wondering, stood on the alert, ready to undertake he knew
not what.
"Nonsense, children; sit down; your father is laughing at you.
Seriously, Tom, without any absurdity, what is it?" cried Lady Mary. "I
wanted him so to-morrow to hear the first lecture--and he did not mean
to stay in town when he left here this morning."
"It is business, mere business," repeated Mr. Tottenham. "We are not all
fine ladies and gentlemen, like you and Phil, Molly. Some of us have to
work for our living. If it hadn't been for Earnshaw, I should, perhaps,
have stayed myself. I think we had better stay in town the night of the
entertainment, Mary. It will be a long drive for you back here, and
still longer for the children. They are going to have a great turn out.
I have been writing invitations all day to the very finest of people. I
don't suppose Her Grace of Middlemarch ever heard anything so fine as
Mr. Watson's solo on the cornet. And, Phil, I rely on you to get an
encore."
"Oh! I like old Watson. I'll clap for him," cried Phil, with facile
change of sentiments; though little Molly kept still eyeing her father
and mother alternately, not quite reassured. And thus the conversation
slid away from Edgar to the usual crotchets of the establishment.
"We have settled all about the seats, and about the refreshments," said
Mr. Tottenham, with an air of content. "You great people will sit in
front, and the members of the establishment who are non-performers, on
the back seats; and the grandest flunkies that ever were seen shall
serve the ices. Oh! John is nothing to them. They shall be divinely
tall, and powdered to their eyebrows; in new silk stockings taken from
our very best boxes, for that night only. Ah, children, you don't know
what is before you! Miss Jemima Robinson is to be Serjeant Buzfuz. She
is sublime in her wig. She is out of the fancy department, and is the
best of saleswomen. We are too busy, we have too much to do to spend
time in improving our minds, like you and your young ladies, Mary; but
you shall see how much native genius Tottenham's can produce."
Harry Thornleigh kept very quiet during this talk. His head was still
rather giddy, poor fellow; his balance was still disturbed by the face
and the eyes and the look which had come to him like a revelation. It
would be vain to say that he had never been in love before; he had been
in love a dozen times, lightly, easily, without much trouble to himself
or anyone else. But now he did not know what had happened to him. He
kept thinking what she would be likely to like, what he could get for
her--if, indeed, he ever was again admitted to her presence, and had
that voiceless demand made upon him. Oh! what a fool he had been, Harry
thought, to waste his means and forestall his allowance, and spend money
for no good, when all the time there was existing in the world a being
like that! I don't know what his allowance had to do with it, and
neither, I suppose, did Harry; but the thought went vaguely through his
head amid a flood of other thoughts equally incoherent. He was glad of
Edgar's absence, though he could not have told why; and when Lady Mary
began, in the drawing-room after dinner, to describe the new-comer to
her husband, he sat listening with glaring eyes till she returned to
that stale and contemptible joke about Mrs. Smith, upon which Harry
retired in dudgeon, feeling deeply ashamed of her levity. He went to the
smoking-room and lit his cigar, and then he strolled out, feeling a want
of fresh air, and of something cool and fresh to calm him down. It was a
lovely starlight night, very cold and keen. All the mists and heavy
vapours had departed with the day, and the sky over Tottenham's was
ablaze with those silvery celestial lights, which woke I cannot tell how
many unusual thoughts, and what vague inexplicable emotion and delicious
sadness in Harry's mind. Something was the matter with him; he could
have cried, though nobody was less inclined to cry in general; the water
kept coming to his eyes, and yet his soul was lost in a vague sense of
happiness. How lovely the stars were; how stupid to sit indoors in a
poky room, and listen to bad jokes and foolish laughter when it was
possible to come out to such a heavenly silence, and to all those
celestial lights. The Aurora Borealis was playing about the sky,
flinging waving rosy tints here and there among the stars, and as he
stood gazing, a great shadowy white arm and hand seemed to flit across
the heavens, dropping something upon him. What was it? the fairy gift
for which those blue eyes had asked him, those eyes which were like the
stars? Harry was only roused from his star-gazing by the vigilant
butler, attended by a footman with a lantern, who made a survey of the
house every night, to see that all the windows and doors were shut, and
that no vagrants were about the premises.
"Beg your pardon, Sir," said that functionary, "but there's a many
tramps about, and we're obliged to be careful."
Harry threw away his cigar, and went indoors; but he did not attempt to
return to the society of his family. Solitude had rather bored him than
otherwise up to this moment; but somehow he liked it that night.
Next morning was as bright and sunshiny as the night had been clear, and
Lady Mary was again bound for the village, with Phil and his sister.
"Come with us, Harry; it will do you good to see what is going on," she
said.
Harry had no expectation of getting any good, but he had nothing to do,
and it seemed possible that he might see or hear of the beautiful
stranger, so he graciously accompanied the little party in their walk.
Lady Mary was in high spirits. She had brought all her schemes to
completion, and on this day her course of lectures was to begin.
Nothing could surpass her own conscientiousness in the matter. No girl
graduate, or boy graduate either, for that matter, was ever more
determined to work out every exercise and receive every word of teaching
from the instructors she had chosen. I do not think that Lady Mary felt
herself badly equipped in general for the work of life; indeed, I
suppose she must have felt, as most clever persons do, a capability of
doing many things better than other people, and of understanding any
subject that was placed before her, with a rapidity and clearness which
had been too often remarked upon to be unknown to herself. She must have
been aware too, I suppose, that the education upon which she harped so
much, had not done everything for its male possessors which she expected
it to do for the women whose deficiencies she so much lamented. I
suppose she must have known this, though she never betrayed her
consciousness of it; but by whatever means it came about, it is certain
that Lady Mary was a great deal more eager for instruction, and more
honestly determined to take the good of it, than any one of the girls at
Harbour Green for whose benefit she worked with such enthusiasm, and who
acquiesced in her efforts, some of them for fun, some of them with a
half fictitious reflection of her enthusiasm, and all, or almost all,
because Lady Mary was the fashion in her neighbourhood, and it was the
right thing to follow her in her tastes and fancies. There was quite a
pretty assembly in the schoolroom when the party from Tottenham's
arrived--all the Miss Witheringtons in a row, and the young ladies from
the Rectory, and many other lesser lights. Harry Thornleigh was somewhat
frightened to find himself among so many ladies, though most of them
were young, and many pretty.
"I'll stay behind backs, thanks," he said, hurriedly, and took up a
position near the door, where Phil joined him, and where the two
conversed in whispers.
"They're going to do sums, fancy," said Phil, opening large eyes, "mamma
and all! though nobody can make them do it unless they like."
"By Jove!" breathed Harry into his moustache. Amaze could go no further,
and he felt words incapable of expressing his sentiments. I don't know
whether the spectacle did the young fellow good, but it stupefied and
rendered him speechless with admiration or horror, I should not like to
say which. "What are they doing it for?" he whispered to Phil, throwing
himself in his consternation even upon that small commentator for
instruction.
Phil's eyes were screwed tightly in his head, round as two great O's of
amazement; but he only shook that organ, and made no response. I think,
on the whole, Phil was the one of all the assembly (except his mother)
who enjoyed it most. He was privileged to sit and look on, while others
were, before his eyes, subjected to the torture from which he had
temporarily escaped. Phil enjoyed it from this point of view; and Lady
Mary enjoyed it in the delight of carrying out her plan, and riding high
upon her favourite hobby. She listened devoutly while the earliest
propositions of Euclid were being explained to her, with a proud and
happy consciousness that thus, by her means, the way to think was opened
to a section at least of womankind; and what was more, this very clever
woman put herself quite docilely at her lecturer's feet, and listened to
every word he said with the full intention of learning how to think in
her own person--notwithstanding that, apart from her hobby, she had
about as much confidence in her own power of thought as most people.
This curious paradox, however, is not so uncommon that I need dwell upon
it. The other persons who enjoyed the lecture most, were, I think, Myra
Witherington, who now and then looked across to her friend Phil, and
made up her pretty face into such a delightful copy of the lecturer's,
that Phil rolled upon his seat with suppressed laughter; and Miss
Annetta Baker, who--there being no possibility of croquet parties at
this time of the year--enjoyed the field-day immensely, and nodded to
her friends, and made notes of Lady Mary's hat, and of the new Spring
dresses in which the Rectory girls certainly appeared too early, with
genuine pleasure. The other ladies present did their best to be very
attentive. Sometimes a faintly smothered sigh would run through the
assembly; sometimes a little cough, taken up like a fugue over the
different benches, gave a slight relief to their feelings; sometimes it
would be a mere rustle of dresses, indicative of a slight universal
movement. The curate's wife, unable to keep up her attention, fell to
adding up her bills within herself, a much more necessary mathematical
exercise in her case, but one also which did very little towards paying
the same, as poor Mrs. Mildmay knew too well. Miss Franks, the old
doctor's eldest daughter, after the first solemnity of the commencement
wore off, began to think of her packing, and what nonsense it was of
papa to send her here when there was so much to do--especially as they
were leaving Harbour Green, and Lady Mary's favour did not matter now.
There was one real student, besides Lady Mary, and that was Ellen
Gregory, the daughter of the postmistress, who sat far back, and was
quite unthought of by the great people, and whose object was to learn a
little Euclid for an approaching examination of pupil-teachers, and not
in the least the art of thinking. Ellen was quite satisfied as to her
powers in that particular; but she knew the effect that a little Euclid
had upon a school-inspector, and worked away with a will, with a mind as
much intent as Lady Mary's, and eyes almost as round as Phil's.
From this it will be seen that Lady Mary's audience was about as little
prepared for abstract education as most other audiences. When it was
over, there was a pleasant stir of relief, and everybody began to
breathe freely. The lecturer came from behind his table, and the ladies
rose from their benches, and everybody shook hands.
"Oh, it was delightful, Lady Mary!" said the eldest Miss Witherington;
"how it does open up one's mental firmament."
"Mr. Thornleigh, will you help me to do the fourth problem?" said Myra.
"I don't understand it a bit--but of course you know all about it."
"I!" cried Harry, recoiling in horror, "you don't mean it, Miss
Witherington? It's a shame to drag a fellow into this sort of thing
without any warning. I couldn't do a sum to save my life!"
"Lady Mary, do you hear? is it any shame to me not to understand it,
when a University man says just the same?" cried Myra, laughing. Poor
Harry felt himself most cruelly assailed, as well as ill-used
altogether, by being led into this extraordinary morning's work.
"I hope there's more use in a University than that rot," he said. "By
Jove, Aunt Mary! I've often heard women had nothing to do--but if you
can find no better way of passing your time than doing sums and
problems, and getting up Euclid at your time of life----"
"Take him away, for heaven's sake, Myra!" whispered Lady Mary; "he is
not a fool when you talk to him. He is just like other young men, good
enough in his way; but I can't be troubled with him now."
"Ah!" cried Myra, with an unconscious imitation of Lady Mary's own
manner, which startled, and terrified, and enchanted all the bystanders,
"if the higher education was only open to us poor women, if we were not
persistently kept from all means of improving ourselves--we might get in
time to be as intellectual as Mr. Thornleigh," she added, laughing in
her own proper voice.
Lady Mary did not hear the end of this speech; she did not see herself
in the little mimic's satire. She was too much preoccupied, and too
serious to notice the fun--and the smiles upon the faces of her friends
annoyed without enlightening her.
"How frivolous we all are," she said, turning to the eldest Miss Baker,
with a sigh; "off at a tangent, as soon as ever the pressure is removed.
I am sure I don't want to think it--but sometimes I despair, and feel
that we must wait for a new generation before any real education is
possible among women. They are all like a set of schoolboys let loose."
"My dear Lady Mary, that is what I am always telling you; not one in a
hundred is capable of any intellectual elevation," said the only
superior person in the assembly; and they drew near the lecturer, and
engaged him in a tough conversation, though he, poor man, having done
his duty, and being as pleased to get it over as the audience, would
have much preferred the merrier crowd who were streaming--with
suppressed laughter, shaking their heads and uttering admonitions to
wicked Myra--out into the sunshine, through the open door.
"Don't do that again," cried Phil, very red. "I say, Myra, I like you
and your fun, and all that; but I'll never speak to you again, as long
as I live, if you take off mamma!"
"I didn't mean it, dear," said Myra, penitent. "I'm so sorry, I beg your
pardon, Phil. Lady Mary's a dear, and I wouldn't laugh at her for all
the world. But don't you ever mimic anyone, there's a good boy; for one
gets into the habit without knowing what one does."
"Oh, that's all very fine," said Phil, feeling the exhortation against a
sin for which he had no capability to be out of place; but he did not
refuse to make up the incipient quarrel. As for Harry, he had not
listened, and consequently was not aware how much share he had in the
cause of the general hilarity.
"I should like to know what all the fun's about," he said. "Good lord!
to see you all at it like girls at school! Ladies are like sheep, it
seems to me--where one goes you all follow; because that good little
aunt of mine has a craze about education, do you all mean to make muffs
of yourselves? Well, I'm not a man that stands up for superior intellect
and that sort of thing--much; but, good gracious! do you ever see men go
in for that sort of nonsense?"
"That is because you are all so much cleverer, and better educated to
start with, Mr. Thornleigh," said Sissy Witherington. He looked up at
her to see if she were laughing at him; but Sissy was incapable of
satire, and meant what she said.
"Well, perhaps there is something in that," said Harry, mollified,
stroking his moustache.
Harry lunched with the Witheringtons at their urgent request, and thus
shook himself free from Phil, who was disposed, in the absence of
Earnshaw, to attach himself to his cousin. Mrs. Witherington made much
of the visitor, not without a passing thought that if by any chance he
should take a fancy to Myra--and of course Myra to him, though that was
a secondary consideration--why, more unlikely things might come to
pass. But Harry showed no dispositions that way, and stood and stared
out of the window of the front drawing-room, after luncheon, towards
Mrs. Smith's lodgings, on the other side of the Green, with a
pertinacity which amazed his hostesses. When he left them he walked in
the same direction slowly, with his eyes still fixed on the cottage with
its green shutters and dishevelled creepers. Poor Harry could not think
of any excuse for a second call; he went along the road towards the
cottage hoping he might meet the object of his thoughts, and stared in
at the window through the matted growth of holly and rhododendrons in
the little garden, equally without effect. She had been seated there on
the previous evening, but she was not seated there now. He took a long
walk, and came back again once more, crossing slowly under the windows,
and examining the place; but still saw nothing. If Margaret had only
known of it, where she sat listlessly inside feeling extremely dull, and
in want of a little excitement, how much good it would have done her!
and she would not have been so unkind as to refuse her admirer a glance.
But she did not know, and Harry went back very unhappy, dull and
depressed, and feeling as if life were worth very little indeed to him.
Had that heavenly vision appeared, only to go out again, to vanish for
ever, from the eyes which could never forget the one glimpse they had
had of her? Harry had never known what it was to be troubled with
extravagant hopes or apprehensions before.
CHAPTER V.
Mrs. Smith.
"Still no Mr. Earnshaw," said Lady Mary. "This business of his and yours
is a long affair then, Tom. I wanted to send down to those cousins of
his to ask them to dinner, or something. I suppose I must write a little
civil note, and tell Mrs. Smith why I delay doing so. It is best to wait
till he comes back."
"I'll take your note, Aunt Mary," said Harry, with alacrity. "Oh, no, it
will not inconvenience me in the least. I shall be passing that way."
"I suppose you want to see the beauty again?" said Lady Mary, smiling.
"She is very pretty. But I don't care much for the looks of the brother.
He has an uncertain way, which would be most uncomfortable in illness.
If he were to stand on one foot, and hesitate, and look at you like
that, to see what you were thinking of him, when some one was ill! A
most uncomfortable doctor. I wish we may not have been premature about
poor old Dr. Franks."
"Anyhow it was not your doing," said Mr. Tottenham.
Lady Mary blushed slightly. She answered with some confusion: "No, I
don't suppose it was." But at the same time she felt upon her
conscience the weight of many remarks, as to country practitioners, and
doctors of the old school, and men who did not advance with the progress
of science even in their own profession, which she had made at various
times, and which, no doubt, had gone forth with a certain influence. She
had not had it in her power to influence Dr. Franks as to the person who
should succeed him; but she had perhaps been a little instrumental in
dethroning the old country doctor of the old school, whose want of
modern science she had perceived so clearly. These remarks were made the
second day after the lecture, and Edgar had not yet returned. Nobody at
Tottenham's knew where he was, or what had become of him; nobody except
the master of the house, who kept his own counsel. Harry had made
another unavailing promenade in front of Mrs. Smith's lodgings on the
day before, and had caught a glimpse of Margaret in a cab, driving with
her brother to some patient, following the old lofty gig which was Dr.
Franks' only vehicle. He had taken off his hat, and stood at the gate of
Tottenham's, worshipping while she passed, and she had given him a smile
and a look which went to his heart. This look and smile seemed the sole
incidents that had happened to Harry; he could not remember anything
else; and when Lady Mary spoke of the note his heart leaped into his
mouth. She had, as usual, a hundred things to do that morning while he
waited, interviews with the housekeeper, with the gardener, with the
nurse, a hundred irrelevant matters. And then she had her letters to
write, a host of letters, at which he looked on with an impatience
almost beyond concealment--letters enclosing circulars, letters asking
for information, letters about her lectures, about other "schemes" of
popular enlightenment, letters to her friends, letters to her family.
Harry counted fifteen while he waited. Good lord! did any clerk in an
office work harder? "And most of them about nothing, I suppose," Harry
said cynically to himself. Luncheon interrupted her in the middle of her
labours, and Harry had to wait till that meal was over before he could
obtain the small envelope, with its smaller enclosure, which justified
his visit. He hurried off as soon as he could leave the table, but not
without a final arrangement of his locks and tie. The long avenue seemed
to flee beneath his feet as he walked down, the long line of trees flew
past him. His heart went quicker than his steps, and so did his pulse,
both of them beating so that he grew dizzy and breathless. Why this
commotion? he said to himself. He was going to visit a lady whom he had
only seen once before; the loveliest woman he had ever seen in his life,
to be sure; but it was only walking so quickly, he supposed, which made
him so panting and excited. He lost time by his haste, for he had to
pause and get command of himself, and calm down, before he could venture
to go and knock at the shabby little green door.
Margaret was seated on the end of the little sofa, which was placed
beside the fire. This, he said to himself, no doubt was the reason why
he had not seen her at the window. She had her work-basket on the
table, and was sewing, with her little girl seated on a stool at her
feet. The little girl was about seven, very like her mother, seated in
the same attitude, and bending her baby brows over a stocking which she
was knitting. Margaret was very plainly, alas! she herself felt, much
too plainly-dressed, in a dark gown of no particular colour, with
nothing whatever to relieve it except a little white collar; her dark
hair, which she also lamented over as quite unlike and incapable of
being coaxed into, the fashionable colour of hair, was done up simply
enough, piled high up upon her head. She had not even a ribbon to lend
her a little colour. And she was not wise enough to know that chance had
befriended her, and that her beautiful pale face looked better in this
dusky colourless setting, in which there was no gleam or reflection to
catch the eye, than it would have done in the most splendid attire. She
raised her eyes when the door opened and rose up, her tall figure, with
a slight wavering stoop, looking more and more like a flexile branch or
tall drooping flower. She put out her hand quite simply, as if he had
been an old friend, and looked no surprise, nor seemed to require any
explanation of his visit, but seated herself again and resumed her work.
So did the child, who had lifted its violet eyes also to look at him,
and now bent them again on her knitting. Harry thought he had never seen
anything so lovely as this group, the child a softened repetition of the
mother--in the subdued greenish atmosphere with winter outside, and the
still warmth within.
"I came from my aunt with this note," said Harry, embarrassed. She
looked up again as he spoke, and this way she had of looking at him only
now and then gave a curious particularity to her glance. He thought,
poor fellow, that his very tone must be suspicious, that her eyes went
through and through him, and that she had found him out. "I mean," he
added, somewhat tremulously, "that I was very glad of--of the chance of
bringing Lady Mary's note; and asking you how you liked the place."
"You are very kind to come," said Margaret in her soft voice, taking the
note. "It's a little lonely, knowing nobody--and a visit is very
pleasant."
The way in which she lingered upon the "very," seemed sweetness itself
to Harry Thornleigh. Had a prejudiced Englishman written down the word,
probably he would, after Margaret's pronunciation, have spelt it
"varry;" but that would be because he knew no better, and would not
really represent the sound, which had a caressing, lingering
superlativeness in it to the listener. She smiled as she spoke, then
opened her letter, and read it over slowly. Then she raised her eyes to
his again with still more brightness in them.
"Lady Mary is very kind, too," she said, with a brightening of pleasure
all over her face.
"She's waiting for your cousin to come back--I suppose she says
so--before asking you to the house; and I hope it will not be long
first, for I am only a visitor here," said Harry impulsively. Margaret
gave him another soft smile, as if she understood exactly what he meant.
"You are not staying very long, perhaps?" she said.
"Oh, for some weeks, I hope; I hope long enough to improve my
acquaintance with--with Dr. Murray and yourself."
"I hope so too," said Margaret, with another smile. "Charlie is troubled
with an anxious mind. To see you so friendly will be very good for him,
very good."
"Oh, I hope you will let me be friendly!" cried Harry, with a glow of
delight. "When does he go out? I suppose he is busy with the old doctor,
visiting the sick people. You were with him yesterday--"
"He thinks it is good for my health to go with him; and then he thinks I
am dull when he's away," said Margaret. "He is a real good brother;
there are not many like him. Yes, he is going about with Dr. Franks
nearly all the day."
"And you are quite alone, and dull? I am so sorry. I wish you would let
me show you the neighbourhood; or if you would come and walk in the park
or the wood--my aunt, I am sure, would be too glad."
"Oh, I'm not dull," said Margaret. "I have my little girl. She is all I
have in the world, except Charles; and we are great companions, are we
no, Sibby?"
This was said with a change in the voice, which Harry thought, made it
still more like a wood-pigeon's note.
"Ay are we," said the little thing, putting down her knitting, and
laying back her little head, like a kitten, rubbing against her mother's
knee. Nothing could be prettier as a picture, more natural, more simple;
and though the child's jargon was scarcely comprehensible to Harry, his
heart answered to this renewed appeal upon it.
"But sometimes," he said, "you must want other companionship than that
of a child."
"Do I?" said Margaret, pressing the little head against her. "I am not
sure. After all, I think I'm happiest with her, thinking of nothing
else; but you, a young man, will scarcely understand that."
"Though I am a young man, I think I can understand it," said Harry. He
seemed to himself to be learning a hundred lessons, with an ease and
facility he was never conscious of before. "But if I were to come and
take you both out for a walk, into the woods, or through the park, to
show you the country, that would be good both for her and you."
"Very good," said Margaret, raising her eyes, "and very kind of you; but
I think I know why you're so very good. You know my cousin, Edgar
Earnshaw, too?"
"Yes; I know him very well," said Harry.
"He must be very good, since everybody is so kind that knows him; and
fancy, I don't know him!" said Margaret. "Charles and he are friends,
but Sibby and I have only seen him once. We have scarcely a right to
all the kind things that are done for his sake."
"Oh, it isn't for his sake," cried Harry. "I like him very much; but
there are other fellows as good as he is. I wouldn't have you make a
hero of Edgar; he is odd sometimes, as well as other folks."
"Tell me something about him; I don't know him, except what he did for
Granny," said Margaret. "It's strange that, though I am his relative,
you should know him so much better. Will you tell me? I would like to
know."
"Oh, there's nothing very wonderful to tell," said Harry, somewhat
disgusted; "he's well enough, and nice enough, but he has his faults.
You must not think that I came for his sake. I came because I thought
you would feel a little lonely, and might be pleased to have some one to
talk to. Forgive me if I was presumptuous."
"Presumptuous! no," said Margaret, with a smile. "You were quite right.
Would you like a cup of tea? it is just about the time. Sibby, go ben
and tell Mrs. Sims we will have some tea."
"She is very like you," said Harry, taking this subject, which he felt
would be agreeable, as a new way of reaching the young mother's heart.
"So they tell me," said Margaret. "She is like what I can mind of
myself, but gentler, and far more good. For, you see, there were always
two of us, Charlie and me."
"You have always been inseparable?"
"We were separated, so long as I was married; but that was but two
years," said Margaret, with a sigh; and here the conversation came to a
pause.
Harry was so touched by her sigh and her pause, that he did not know how
to show his sympathy. He would have liked to say on the spot, "Let me
make it all up to you now;" but he did not feel that this premature
declaration would be prudent. And then he asked himself, what did she
mean? that the time of her separation from her brother was sad? or that
she was sad that it came to an end so soon? With natural instinct, he
hoped it might be the former. He was looking at her intently, with
interest and sympathy in every line of his face, when she looked up
suddenly, as her manner was, and caught him--with so much more in his
looks than he ventured to say.
Margaret was half amused, half touched, half flattered; but she did not
let the amusement show. She said, gratefully, "You are very kind to take
so much interest in a stranger like me."
"I do not feel as if you were a stranger," cried Harry eagerly; and then
not knowing how to explain this warmth of expression, he added in haste,
"you know I have known--we have all known your cousin for years."
Margaret accepted the explanation with a smile, "You all? You are one of
a family too--you have brothers and sisters like Charles and me?"
"Not like you. I have lots of brothers and sisters, too many to think of
them in the same way. There is one of my sisters whom I am sure you
would like," said Harry, who had always the fear before his eyes that
the talk would flag, and his companion get tired of him--a fear which
made him catch wildly at any subject which presented itself.
"Yes?" said Margaret, "tell me her name, and why you think I would like
her best."
From this it will be seen that she too was not displeased to keep up the
conversation, nor quite unskilled in the art.
"The tea's coming," said little Sibby, running in and taking her seat on
her footstool. Perhaps Harry thought he had gone far enough in the
revelation of his family, or perhaps only that this was a better
subject. He held out his hand and made overtures of friendship to the
little girl.
"Come and tell me your name," he said, "shouldn't you like to come up
with me to the house, and play with my little cousins in the nursery?
There are three or four of them, little things. Shouldn't you like to
come with me?"
"No without mamma," said little Sibby, putting one hand out timidly, and
with the other clinging to her mother's dress.
"Oh, no," said Harry, "not without mamma, she must come too; but you
have not told me your name. She is shy, I suppose."
"A silly thing," said Margaret, stroking her child's dark hair. "Her
name is Sybilla, Sybil is prettier; but in Scotland we call it Sibby,
and sometimes Bell for short. Now, dear, you must not hold me, for the
gentleman will not eat you, and here is the tea."
Harry felt himself elected into one of the family, when Mrs. Sims came
in, pushing the door open before her, with the tray in her arms; upon
which there was much bread and butter of which he partook, finding it
delightful, with a weakness common to young men in the amiable company
of the objects of their affection. He drew his chair to the table
opposite to Margaret, and set Sibby up on an elevated seat at the other
side, and felt a bewildering sensation come over him as if they belonged
to him. It was not a very high ideal of existence to sit round a red and
blue table in a cottage parlour of a winter's afternoon, and eat bread
and butter; but yet Harry felt as if nothing so delightful and so
elevating had ever happened to him before in all his life.
It was a sad interruption to his pleasure, when Dr. Murray came in
shortly afterwards, pushing the door open as Mrs. Sims had done, and
entering with the air of a man to whom, and not to Harry, the place
belonged. He had his usual doubtful air, looking, as Lady Mary said, to
see what you thought of him, and not sure that his sister was not
showing an injudicious confidence in thus revealing to Harry the
existence of such a homely meal as tea. But he had no desire to send the
visitor away, especially when Margaret, who knew her brother's humour,
propitiated him by thrusting into his hand Lady Mary's note.
"I am sure her Ladyship is very kind," he said, his face lighting up,
"Margaret, I hope you have written a proper reply."
"When we have had our tea, Charles--will you not have some tea?" his
sister said; she always took things so easily, so much more easily than
he could ever do.
"Oh, you are having tea with the child, five o'clock tea," said the poor
doctor, who was so anxious to make sure that everybody knew him to have
been "brought up a gentleman;" and he smiled a bland uneasy smile, and
sat down by Sibby. He would not take any bread and butter, though he was
hungry after a long walk; he preferred Harry to think that he was about
to dine presently, which was far from being the case. But Harry neither
thought of the matter nor cared; he had no time nor attention to spare,
though he was very civil to her brother, and engaged him at once in
conversation, making himself agreeable with all his might.
"I suppose you are making acquaintance with quantities of people, and I
hope you think you will like the place," he said.
"Yes, a great many people," said Dr. Charles, "and it was full time that
somebody should come who knew what he was doing. Dr. Franks, I am
afraid, is no better than an old wife."
"Oh, Charlie, how rashly you speak! he always says out what he thinks,"
said Margaret with an appealing look at Harry, "and it is often very far
from a wise thing to do."
"Bravo, Aunt Mary will be delighted," cried Harry, "it is what she
always said."
"I knew Lady Mary Tottenham was very talented," said Dr. Murray with
some pomp, "and that she would see the state of affairs. I can't tell
you what a pleasure and support it is to have a discriminating person in
the neighbourhood. He is just an old wife. You need not shake your head
at me, Margaret, I know Mr. Thornhill is a gentleman, and that he will
not repeat what is said."
"Surely not," said Harry, somewhat surprised to find himself thus put on
his honour; "but my name is Thornleigh; never mind, it was a very simple
mistake."
The doctor blushed with annoyance, and confounded himself in excuses.
Harry took his leave before these apologies were half over. He was
rather glad to get away at the last, feeling that a shadow had come over
his happiness; but before he had left the Green, this momentary shade
disappeared, and all the bliss of recollection came back upon him. What
an hour he had spent, of happiness pure and unalloyed, with so many
smiles, so many looks to lay up as treasures! how lovely she was, how
simple, how superior to everything he had ever seen before! Talk of
fashion, Harry said to himself hotly, talk of rank and society and high
birth, and high breeding! here was one who had no need of such
accessories, here was a perfect creature, made in some matchless mould
that the world had never seen before; and how kindly she had looked at
him, how sweetly talked to him! What had he done, that he should have
suddenly fallen upon such happiness?
CHAPTER VI.
In Love.
Life had become a new thing altogether for Harry Thornleigh. Up to this
time his existence had been that of his immediate surroundings, an
outward life so to speak. The history of the visible day in any
household of which he formed a part would have been his history, not
much more nor less; but this easy external existence was over for him.
He began to have a double being from the moment he saw Margaret. All
that he was most conscious of, was within him, a life of thought, of
recollection, of musing, and imagination; and external matters affected
him but vaguely through the cloud of this more intimate consciousness.
Yet his faculties were at the same time quickened, and the qualities of
his mind brought out--or so at least he felt. He had been very angry
with Lady Mary for her mirth over Mrs. Smith's name; but his new
feelings (though they originated this anger) seemed to give him prudence
and cleverness enough to make an instrument of the very jest he
detested. He began to speak of Mrs. Smith the morning after his visit to
her, restraining his temper admirably, and opening the subject in the
most good-humoured way.
"I delivered your note, Aunt Mary," he said; "you are right after all,
about the name. It is ridiculous. Mrs. Smith! after being Miss Murray,
as I suppose she was. She ought to change back again."
"There are other ways of changing," said Lady Mary, "and I daresay such
a pretty woman could easily do it if she wished. Yes, I got a very nice
little note from her, thanking me. Though I am disappointed in the
brother, I must show them some civility. Did you hear when they were to
get into their house?"
Harry had not heard; but he propitiated his aunt by telling her what was
Dr. Murray's opinion of his predecessor, an opinion which greatly
comforted Lady Mary, and made her feel herself quite justified in the
part she had taken in the matter.
"There must be more in him than I thought," she said, in high
good-humour; and then Harry felt bold to make his request.
"The sister," he said, toning down the superlatives in which he felt
disposed to speak of that peerless being, with an astuteness of which he
felt half-ashamed, half-proud, "is rather lonely, I should think, in
that poky little place; and she has a nice little girl about Molly's
age." (This was a very wild shot, for Harry had about as much idea of
their relative ages as he had about the distances between two stars).
"They don't know any one, and I don't think she's very strong. Without
asking them formally, Aunt Mary, don't you think you might have her and
the child up to luncheon or something, to see the conservatories and all
that? it would be a little change for them. They looked rather dismal in
Mrs. Sims' parlour, far from everything they know."
"How considerate and kind of you, Harry!" cried Lady Mary. "I am ashamed
of myself for not having thought of it. Of course, poor thing, she must
be lonely--nothing to do, and probably not even any books. The Scotch
all read; they are better educated a great deal than we are. To be sure,
you are quite right. I might drive down to-morrow, and fetch her to
lunch. But, by-the-by, I have Herr Hartstong coming to-morrow, who is to
give the botany lecture--"
"An extra lady and a little girl would not hurt Herr Hartstong."
"There is no telling," said Lady Mary, with a laugh, "such a pretty
creature as she is. But I think he has a wife already. I only meant I
could not go to fetch her. But to be sure she's a married woman, and I
don't see what harm there would be. You might do that."
"With the greatest pleasure," cried Harry, trying with all his might to
keep down his exultation, and not let it show too much in his face and
voice.
"Then we'll settle it so. You can take the ponies, and a fur cloak to
wrap her in, as she's delicate; and Herr Hartstong must take his chance.
But, by the way," Lady Mary added, pausing, turning round and looking at
him--"by the way, you are of a great deal more importance. You must
take care she does not harm you."
"Me!" said Harry, with a wild flutter at his heart, forcing to his lips
a smile of contempt. "I am a likely person, don't you think, to be
harmed by anybody belonging to the country doctor? I thought, Aunt Mary,
you had more knowledge of character."
"Your class exclusivism is revolting, Harry," cried Lady Mary, severely.
"A young man with such notions is an anachronism; I can't understand how
you and I can come of the same race. But perhaps it's just as well in
this case," she added, gliding back into her easier tone. "Your mother
would go mad at the thought of any such danger for you."
"I hope I can take care of myself by this time, without my mother's
help," said Harry, doing his best to laugh. He was white with rage and
self-restraint; and the very sound of that laugh ought to have put the
heedless aunt, who was thus helping him on the way to destruction, on
her guard. But Lady Mary's mind was occupied by so many things, that she
had no attention to bestow on Harry; besides the high confidence she
felt in him as an unimpressionable blockhead and heart-hardened young
man of the world.
To-morrow, however--this bliss was only to come to-morrow--and
twenty-four hours had to be got through somehow without seeing her.
Harry once more threw himself in the way persistently. He went down to
the village, and called upon all his old acquaintances; he kept about
the Green the whole afternoon; but Margaret did not appear. At last,
when his patience would hold out no longer, he called at the cottage,
saying to himself, that in case Lady Mary had forgotten to write, it
would be kind to let her know what was in store for her. But, alas! she
was not to be found at the cottage. How she had been able to go out
without being seen, Harry could not tell, but he had to go back drearily
at night without even a glimpse of her. What progress his imagination
had made in three or four days! The very evening seemed darker, the
stars less divine, the faint glimmers of the Aurora which kept shooting
across the sky had become paltry and unmeaning. If that was all
electricity could do, Harry felt it had better not make an exhibition of
itself. Was it worth while to make confusion among the elements for so
little? was it worth while to suffer the bondage of society, to go
through luncheons and dinners, and all the common action of life without
even a glance or a smile to make a man feel that he had a soul in him
and a heaven above him? Thus wildly visionary had poor Harry become all
in a moment, who had never of his own free will read a line of poetry in
his life.
"I am so sorry to give you the trouble, Harry," said Lady Mary, pausing
for a moment in her conversation with Herr Hartstong (whose lecture was
to be given next morning) to see the ponies go off.
"Oh! I don't mind it once in a way," said the young man, scarcely able
to restrain the laughter with which, partly from sheer delight, partly
from a sense of the ludicrous inappropriateness of her apology, he was
bursting. He went down the avenue like an arrow, the ponies tossing
their heads, and ringing their bells, the wintry sunshine gleaming on
him through the long lines of naked trees. Margaret, to whom Lady Mary
had written, was waiting for him with a flush of pleasure upon her pale
face, and a look of soft grateful friendliness in her beautiful eyes.
"It was kind of you to come for us," she said, looking up at him.
"I am so glad to come," said Harry, with all his heart in his voice. He
wrapt her in the warm furs, feeling somehow, with a delicious sense of
calm and security, that, for the moment, she belonged to him. "The
morning is so fine, and the ponies are so fresh, that I think we might
take a turn round the park," he said. "You are not afraid of them?"
"Oh no! the bonnie little beasties," cried Margaret, leaning back with
languid enjoyment. She had often harnessed the rough pony at Loch Arroch
with her own hands, and driven him to the head of the loch without
thinking of fear, though she looked now so dainty and delicate; but she
did not feel inclined to tell Harry this, or even to recall to herself
so homely a recollection. Margaret had been intended by nature for a
fine lady. She lay back in the luxurious little carriage, wrapped in the
furred mantle, and felt herself whisked through the sunny wintry air to
the admiration of all beholders, with a profound sense of enjoyment.
She liked the comfort dearly. She liked the dreamy pleasure which was
half of the mind, and half of the body. She liked the curtseys of the
gatekeepers, and the glances of the stray walkers, who looked after her,
she thought, with envy. She felt it natural that she should thus be
surrounded by things worthy, and pleasant, and comfortable. Even the
supreme gratification of the young attendant by her side, whose
infatuation began to shew itself so clearly in his eyes, was a climax of
pleasure to Margaret, which she accepted easily without fear of the
consequences.
Yes, she thought, he was falling in love with her, poor boy; and it is
seldom unpleasant to be fallen in love with. Most probably his people
would put a stop, to it, and as she did not mean to give him what she
called "any encouragement," there would be no harm done. Whereas, on the
other hand, if his people did not interfere, there was always the chance
that it might come to something. Margaret did not mean any harm--she was
only disposed to take the Scriptural injunction as her rule, and to let
the morrow care for the things of itself.
She lay back in the little carriage with the grey feather in her hat
swaying like her slight figure, and Sibby held fast in her arms.
"I feel as if I were in a nest," she said, when Harry asked tenderly if
she felt the cold; and thus they flew round the park, where a little
stir of Spring was visible in the rough buds, and where here and there
one dewy primrose peeped forth in a sheltered nook--the ponies' hoofs
ringing, and their heads tossing, and their bells tinkling--Harry lost
in a foolish joy beyond expression, and she wrapped in delicious
comfort. He was thinking altogether of her, she almost altogether of
herself--and of her child, who was another self.
"I have enjoyed it so much," she said softly, as he helped her to get
out in front of the hall door.
"I do not think I ever spent so happy a morning," Harry said very low.
Margaret made no sign of having heard him. She walked upstairs without
any reply, leaving him without ceremony. "He is going too fast," she
said to herself. And Harry was a little, just a little, mortified, but
soon got over that, and went after her, and was happy once more--happy
as the day was long. Indeed, the visit altogether was very successful.
Margaret was full of adaptability, very ready to accept any tone which
such a personage as Lady Mary chose to give to the conversation, and
with, in reality, a lively and open intelligence, easily roused to
interest. Besides, though an eager young admirer like Harry was pleasant
enough, and might possibly become important, she never for a moment
deceived herself as to the great unlikelihood that his friends would
permit him to carry out his fancy; and the chance that, instead of
bringing advantage, she might bring harm to herself and her brother if
she gave any one a right to say that she had "encouraged" him. Whereas
nothing but unmingled good could come from pleasing Lady Mary, who was,
in every way, the more important person. This being the principle of
Margaret's conduct, it is almost unnecessary to say that Lady Mary found
it perfect, and felt that nothing could be in better taste than the way
in which the young Scotchwoman kept Harry's attentions down, and
accorded the fullest attention to her own observations. She even took
her nephew aside after luncheon, to impress upon him a greater respect
for their guest.
"This Mrs. Smith is evidently a very superior person," said Lady Mary,
"and I am sorry to see, Harry, that you are rather disposed to treat her
simply as a very pretty young woman. I am not at all sure that you have
not been trying to flirt with her during lunch."
"I--flirt!--Aunt Mary," stammered Harry, "you altogether mistake--"
"Oh, of course, you never did such a thing in your life," she said
mocking, "but this is not quite an ordinary young lady. The Scotch are
so well educated--we can see at a glance that she has read a great deal,
and thought as well--which is by no means common. If you take her round
the conservatories, you must recollect that it is not a mere pretty girl
you are with, Harry. She will not understand your nonsense," said Lady
Mary with a little warmth.
She, herself, had some final arrangements to make with Herr Hartstong,
who was also very much interested in the graceful listener, from whom he
had received such flattering attention. He made her his best bow, and
hoped he should see her next day at the lecture, when Harry, doing his
best to suppress all manifestations of feeling, led her away.
"It is so kind of you to let me treat you without ceremony," said Lady
Mary. "Show Mrs. Smith the orchids, Harry. Before you get to the palm
tree, I shall be with you--" and then Harry was free and alone with his
enchantress. He could not talk to her--he was so happy--he led her away
quickly out of sight of his aunt--who had seated herself in a corner of
the big drawing-room, to settle all her final arrangements with the
botanist--and of Herr Hartstong's big yellow eyes, which looked after
him with suspicion. Harry was eager to get her to himself, to have her
alone, out of sight of everybody; but when he had secured this
isolation, he could not make much use of it. He was dumb with bliss and
excitement--he took her into the fairy palace of flowers where summer
reigned in the midst of winter; and instead of making use of his
opportunities in this still perfumy place, where everything suited the
occasion, found that he had nothing to say. He had talked, laboriously
it is true, but still he had talked, when he had called on her at the
cottage; he had made a few remarks while he drove her round the park;
but on this, the first opportunity he had of being alone with her, he
felt his tongue tied. Instead of taking her to the orchids as Lady Mary
had suggested, he conducted her straight to the palm tree, and there
placed her on the sofa, and stood by, gazing at her, concealing his
agitation by cutting sprays of Cape jasmine, of which there happened to
be a great velvety cluster in front of her seat.
"It is like something in a book," said Margaret, with a sigh. "What a
fine thing it is to be very rich! I never was in such a beautiful
place."
"Yes, it's nice to be well off," said Harry; "but heaps of people are
well off who never could invent anything so pretty. You see Tottenham
was very much in love with Aunt Mary. She's a nice little woman," he
added, parenthetically. "A man in love will do a deal to please the
woman he likes."
"Yes, I suppose so," said Margaret, feeling somewhat disposed to laugh;
"and that makes it all the more interesting. Is Mr. Tottenham very
poetical and romantic? I have not seen him yet."
"Tottenham poetical!" cried Harry, with a laugh; "no, not exactly. And
that's an old affair now, since they've been married about a century;
but it shows what even a dull man can do. Don't you think love's a very
rum thing?" said the young man, cutting the Cape jasmine all to pieces;
"don't you think so? A fellow doesn't seem to know what he is doing."
"Does Lady Mary let you cut her plants to pieces, Mr. Thornleigh?" said
Margaret, feeling her voice quaver with amusement. Upon which Harry
stopped short, and looked sheepishly down at the bunch of flowers in his
hand.
"I meant to get you a nosegay, and here is a great sheaf like a
coachman's bouquet on a drawing-room day," cried Harry, half conscious
of this very distinct commentary upon his words. "Never mind, I'll tell
the gardener. I suppose there are heaps more."
"How delightful to have heaps more!" said Margaret. "I don't think poor
folk should ever be brought into such fairy places. I used to think
myself so lucky with a half-a-dozen plants."
"Then you are fond of flowers?" said Harry.
What woman, nay, what civilised person of the present age, ever made but
one answer to such a question? There are a few people left in the world,
and only a few, who still dare to say they are not fond of music; but
fond of flowers!
"I do so wish you would let me keep you supplied," said Harry, eagerly.
"Trouble! it would be the very reverse of trouble; it would be the very
greatest pleasure--and I could do it so easily--"
"Are you a cultivator, then?" said Margaret, "a great florist?" she said
it with a half-consciousness of the absurdity, yet half deceived by his
earnestness. Harry himself was startled for the moment by the question.
"A florist! Oh, yes, in a kind of a way," he said, trying to restrain an
abrupt momentary laugh. A florist? yes; by means of Covent Garden, or
some ruinous London nurseryman. But Margaret knew little of such
refinements. "It would be such a pleasure to me," he said, anxiously.
"May I do it? And then you will not be able quite to forget my very
existence."
Margaret got up, feeling the conversation had gone far enough. "May not
I see the--orchids? It was the orchids I think that Lady Mary said."
"This is the way," said Harry, almost sullen, feeling that he had fallen
from a great height. He went after her with his huge handful of velvety
jasmine flowers. He did not like to offer them, he did not dare to strew
them at her feet that she might walk upon them, which was what he would
have liked best. He flung them aside into a corner in despite and
vexation. Was he angry with her? If such a sentiment had been possible,
that would have been, he felt, the feeling in his mind. But Margaret was
not angry nor annoyed, though she had stopped the conversation, feeling
it had gone far enough. To "give him encouragement," she felt, was the
very last thing that, in her position, she dared to do. She liked the
boy, all the same, for liking her. It gave her a soothing consciousness
of personal well-being. She was glad to please everybody, partly because
it pleased herself, partly because she was of a kindly and amiable
character. She had no objection to his admiration, to his love, if the
foolish boy went so far, so long as no one had it in his power to say
that she had given him encouragement; that was the one thing upon which
her mind was fully made up; and then, whatever came of it, she would
have nothing with which to reproach herself. If his people made a
disturbance, as they probably would, and put a stop to his passion, why,
then, Margaret would not be to blame; and if, on the contrary, he had
strength of mind to persevere, or they, by some wonderful chance, did
not oppose, why then Margaret would reap the benefit. This seems a
somewhat selfish principle, looking at it from outside, but I don't
think that Margaret had what is commonly called a selfish nature. She
was a perfectly sober-minded unimpassioned woman, very affectionate in
her way, very kind, loving comfort and ease, but liking to partake these
pleasures with those who surrounded her. If fate had decreed that she
should marry Harry Thornleigh, she knew very well that she would make
him an admirable wife, and she would have been quite disposed to adapt
herself to the position. But in the meantime she would do nothing to
commit herself, or to bring this end, however desirable it might be in
itself, about.
CHAPTER VII.
No Encouragement.
"You must not take any more trouble with me," said Margaret, "my brother
will come up for me; it will be quite pleasant to walk down in the
gloaming--I mean--" she added, with a slight blush over her vernacular,
"in the twilight, before it is quite dark."
"Oh! pray don't give up those pretty Scotch words," said Lady Mary,
"gloaming is sweeter than twilight. Do you know I am so fond of Scotch,
the accent as well as the words."
Margaret replied only by a dubious smile. She would rather have been
complimented on her English; and as she could not make any reply to her
patroness' enthusiasm, she continued what she was saying:
"Charles wishes to call and tell you how much he is gratified by your
kindness, and the walk will be pleasant. You must not let me give you
more trouble."
"No trouble," said Lady Mary, "but you shall have the close carriage,
which will be better for you than Harry and the ponies. I hope he did
not frighten you in the morning. I don't think I could give him a
character as coachman; he all but upset me the other night, when we
left your house--to be sure I had been aggravating--eh, Harry?" she
said, looking wickedly at him. "It was very good of you to let me have
my talk out with the Professor; ladies will so seldom understand that
business goes before pleasure. And I hope you will do as he asked, and
come to the lecture to-morrow."
"I am not very understanding about lectures," said Margaret.
"Are not you? you look very understanding about everything," said Lady
Mary. She too, as well as Harry, had fallen in love with the doctor's
sister. The effect was not perhaps so sudden; but Lady Mary was a woman
of warm sympathies, and sudden likings, and after a few hours in
Margaret's society she had quite yielded to her charm. She found it
pleasant to look at so pretty a creature, pleasant to meet her
interested look, her intelligent attention. There could not be a better
listener, or a more delightful disciple; she might not perhaps know a
great deal herself, but then she was so willing to adopt your views, or
at least to be enlightened by them. Lady Mary sat by, and looked at her
after the promenade round the conservatories, with all a woman's
admiration for beauty of the kind which women love. This, as all the
world knows, is not every type; but Margaret's drooping shadowy figure,
her pathetic eyes, her soft paleness, and gentle deferential manner,
were all of the kind that women admire. Lady Mary "fell in love" with
the stranger. They were all three seated in the conservatory in the warm
soft atmosphere, under the palm tree, and the evening was beginning to
fall. The great fire in the drawing-room shone out like a red star in
the distance, through all the drooping greenness of the plants, and they
began half to lose sight of each other, shadowed, as this favourite spot
was, by the great fan branches of the palm.
"I think there never was such delightful luxury as this," said Margaret,
softly. "Italy must be like it, or some of the warm islands in the sea."
"In the South Sea?" said Lady Mary, smiling, "perhaps; but both the
South Seas and Italy are homes of indolence, and I try all I can to keep
that at arm's length. But I assure you Herr Hartstong was not so
poetical; he gave me several hints about the management of the heat. Do
come to-morrow and hear him, my dear Mrs. Smith. Botany is wonderfully
interesting. Many people think it a dilettante young-lady-like
science; but I believe in the hands of a competent professor it is
something very different. Do let me interest you in my scheme. You know,
I am sure, and must feel, how little means of education there are--and
as little Sibby will soon be craving for instruction like my child--"
"I suppose there is no good school for little girls here?" said
Margaret, timidly; her tact told her that schools for little girls were
not in question; but she did not know what else to say.
"Oh!" said Lady Mary, with momentary annoyance; "for mere reading and
writing, yes, I believe there is one; but it is the higher instruction I
mean," she added, recovering herself, "probably you have not had your
attention directed to it; and to be sure in Scotland the standard is so
much higher, and education so much more general."
Margaret had the good sense to make no reply. She had herself received a
solid education at the parish school of Loch Arroch, along with all the
ploughboys and milkmaids of the district, and had been trained into
English literature and the Shorter Catechism, in what was then
considered a very satisfactory way. No doubt she was so much better
instructed than her patroness that Lady Mary scarcely knew what the
Shorter Catechism was. But Margaret was not proud of this training,
though she was aware that the parochial system had long been a credit to
Scotland--and would much rather have been able to say that she was
educated at Miss So-and-So's seminary for young ladies. As she could not
claim any such Alma Mater, she held her tongue, and listened devoutly,
and with every mark of interest while Lady Mary's scheme was propounded
to her. Though, however, she was extremely attentive, she did not commit
herself by any promise, not knowing how far her Loch Arroch scholarship
would carry her in comparison with the young ladies of Harbour Green.
She consented only conditionally to become one of Lady Mary's band of
disciples.
"If I have time," she said; and then Lady Mary, questioning, drew from
her a programme of her occupations, which included the housekeeping,
Sibby's lessons, and constant attendance, when he wanted her, upon her
brother. "I drive with him," said Margaret, "for he thinks it is good
for my health--and then there is always a good deal of sewing."
"But," said Lady Mary, "that is bad political economy. You neglect your
mind for the sake of the sewing, when there are many poor creatures to
whom, so to speak, the sewing belongs, who have to make their livelihood
by working, and whom ladies' amateur performances throw out of bread."
Thus the great lady discoursed the poor doctor's sister, who but for him
would probably have been one of the said poor creatures; this, however,
it did not enter into Lady Mary's mind to conceive. Margaret was
overawed by the grandeur of the thought. For the first moment, she could
not even laugh covertly within herself at the thought of her own useful
sewing being classified as a lady's amateur performance. She was silent,
not venturing to say anything for herself, and Lady Mary resumed.
"I really must have you among my students; think how much more use you
would be to Sibby, if you kept up, or even extended, your own
acquirements. Of course, I say all this with diffidence, because I know
that in Scotland education is so much more thought of, and is made so
much more important than it is with us."
"Oh, no!" cried Margaret. She could not but laugh now, thinking of the
Loch Arroch school. And after all, the Loch Arroch school is the point
in which Scotland excels England, or did excel her richer neighbour; and
the idea of poor Margaret being better educated than the daughter of an
English earl, moved even her tranquil spirit to laughter. "Oh, no; you
would not think that if you knew," she said, controlling herself with an
effort. If it had not been for a prudent sense that it was best not to
commit herself, she would have been deeply tempted to have her laugh
out, and confide the joke to her companions. As it was, however, this
suppressed sense of ridicule was enough to make her uncomfortable. "I
will try to go," she said gently, changing the immediate theme, "after
the trouble of the flitting is over, when we have got into our house."
Lady Mary fell into the snare. She began to ask about the house, and
whether they had brought furniture, or what they meant to do, and
entered into all the details with a frank kindness which went to
Margaret's heart. During all this conversation, Harry Thornleigh kept
coming and going softly, gliding among the plants, restless, but happy.
He could not have her to himself any longer. He could not talk to her;
but yet she was there, and making her way into the heart of at least one
of his family. While these domestic subjects were discussed, and as the
evening gradually darkened, Harry said to himself that he had always
been very fond of his aunt, and that she was very nice and sympathetic,
and that to secure her for a friend would be wise in any case. It was
almost night before Dr. Murray made his appearance, and he was
confounded by the darkness of the place into which he was ushered, where
he could see nothing but shadows among the plants and against the pale
lightness of the glass roofs. I am not sure, for the moment, that he was
not half offended by being received in so unceremonious a way. He stood
stiffly, looking about him, till Lady Mary half rose from her seat.
"Excuse me for having brought you here," she said; "this is our
favourite spot, where none but my friends ever come."
Lady Mary felt persuaded that she saw, even in the dark, the puffing out
of the chest with which this friendly speech was received.
"For such a pleasant reason one would excuse a much worse place," he
said, with an attempt at ease, to the amusement of the great lady who
was condescending to him. Excuse his introduction to her conservatory!
He should never have it in his power to do so again. Dr. Charles then
turned to his sister, and said, "Margaret, we must be going. You and the
child have troubled her Ladyship long enough."
"I am delighted with Mrs. Smith's society, and Sibby has been a godsend
to the children," said Lady Mary. "Let us go into the drawing-room,
where there are lights, and where we can at least see each other. I like
the gloaming, your pretty Scotch word; but I daresay Dr. Murray thinks
us all rather foolish, sitting like crows in the dark."
She led the way in, taking Margaret's arm, while Margaret, with a little
thrill of annoyance, tried through the imperfect light to throw a
warning look at her brother. Why did he speak so crossly, he who was
never really cross; and why should he say ladyship? Margaret knew no
better than he did, and yet instinct kept her from going wrong.
Dr. Murray entered the drawing-room, looking at the lady who had
preceded him, to see what she thought of him, with furtive, suspicious
looks. He was very anxious to please Lady Mary, and still more anxious
to show himself an accomplished man of the world; but he could not so
much as enter a room without this subtle sense of inferiority betraying
itself. Harry, coming after him, thought the man a cad, and writhed at
the thought; but he was not at all a cad. He hesitated between the most
luxurious chair he could find, and the hardest, not feeling sure whether
it was best to show confidence or humility. When he did decide at last,
he looked round with what seemed a defiant look. "Who can say I have no
right to be here?" poor fellow, was written all over his face.
"You have been making acquaintance with your patients? I hope there are
no severe cases," said Lady Mary.
"No, none at all, luckily for them--or I should not have long answered
for their lives," he said, with an unsteady smile.
"Ah! you do not like Dr. Franks' mode of treatment? Neither do I. I have
disapproved of him most highly sometimes; and I assure you," said Lady
Mary, in her most gracious tone, "I am so very glad to know that there
is now some one on the spot who may be trusted, whatever happens. With
one's nursery full of children, that question becomes of the greatest
importance. Many an anxious moment I have had."
And then there was a pause. Dr. Murray was unbending, less afraid of how
people looked at him.
"My cousin Mr. Earnshaw has not yet come back?" he said.
"He is occupied with some business in town. I am only waiting, as I told
your sister, till he comes. As soon as he does so, I hope we may see
more of you here; but in the meantime, Mrs. Smith must come to me. I
hope I shall see a great deal of her; and you must spare her for my
lectures, Dr. Murray. You must not let her give herself up too much to
her housekeeping, and all her thrifty occupations."
"Margaret has no occasion to be overthrifty," he said, looking at her.
"I have always begged her to go into society. We have not come to that,
that my sister should be a slave to her housekeeping. Margaret,
remember, I hope you will not neglect what her Ladyship says."
"After the flitting," said Margaret, softly.
"Ah, yes; after our removal. We shall then have a room more fit to
receive you in," he said. "I hear on all hands that it is a very good
house."
At this moment some one came in to announce the carriage, which Lady
Mary had ordered to take her visitor home; and here there arose another
conflict in Dr. Murray's mind. Which was best, most like what a man of
the world would do? to drive down with his sister or to walk? He was
tired, and the drive would certainly be the easier; but what if they
should think it odd? The doctor was saved from this dilemma by Harry,
who came unwittingly to the rescue, and proposed to walk down the avenue
with him. Harry had not fallen in love with him as with his sister; but
still he was at that stage when a man is anxious to conciliate everybody
belonging to the woman whom he loves. And then little Sibby was brought
down from the nursery, clasping closely a doll which had been presented
to her by the children in a body, with eyes blazing like two stars, and
red roses of excitement upon her little cheeks. Never in all her life
before had Sibby spent so happy a day. And when she and her mother had
been placed in the warm delicious carriage, is it wonderful that various
dreams floated into Margaret's mind as she leant back in her corner, and
was whirled past those long lines of trees. Harry had been ready to give
her his arm downstairs, to put her into the carriage. He had whispered,
with a thrill in his voice:
"May I bring those books to-morrow?"
He had all but brushed her dress with his face, bowing over her in his
solicitude. Ah, how comfortable it would be, how delightful to have a
house like that, a carriage like this, admiring, soft-mannered people
about her all day long, and nothing to do but what she pleased to do!
Had she begun to cherish a wish that Harry's fancy might not be a
temporary one, that he might persevere in it, and overcome opposition?
It would be hard to expect from Margaret such perfection of goodness as
never to allow such a train of thought to enter her mind; but at the
same time her practical virtue stood all assaults. She would never
encourage him; this she vowed over again, though with a sensation almost
of hope, and a wish unexpressed in her heart.
For ah! what a difference there is between being poor and being
rich--between Lady Mary in the great house, and Margaret Murray, or
Smith, in Mrs. Sims' lodging!--and if you went to the root of the
matter, the one woman was as good as the other, as well adapted to
"ornament her station," as old-fashioned people used to say. I think, on
the whole, it was greatly to Margaret's credit, seeing that so much was
at stake, that she never wavered in her determination to give Harry no
encouragement. But she meant to put no barrier definitively in his way,
no obstacle insuperable. She was willing enough to be the reward of his
exertions, should he be successful in the lists; and Lady Mary's
kindness, nay, affectionateness towards her seemed to point to a
successful issue of the struggle, if Harry went into it with
perseverance and vigour. She could not help being a little excited by
the thought.
Lady Mary, on her side, was charmed with her new friend. "The brother
may be a cad, as you say, but she is perfection," she said incautiously
to Harry, when he came in with a glowing countenance from his walk.
"What good breeding, what grace, what charming graceful ways she has!
and yet always the simplicity of that pretty Scotch accent, and of the
words which slip out now and then. The children are all in raptures with
little Sibby. Fancy making a graceful name like Sybil into such a
hideous diminutive! But that is Scotch all over. They seem to take a
pleasure in keeping their real refinement in the background, and showing
a rough countenance to the world. They are all like that," said Lady
Mary, who was fond of generalizations.
Harry did not say much, but he drew a chair close to the fire, and sat
and mused over it with sparkling eyes, when his aunt went to dress for
dinner. He did not feel capable of coherent thought at all; he was lost
in a rapture of feeling which would not go into words. He felt that he
could sit there all night long not wishing to budge, to be still, not
even thinking, existing in the mere atmosphere of the wonderful day
which was now over. Would it come back again? would it prolong itself?
would his life grow into a lengthened sweet repetition of this day? He
sat there with his knees into the fire, gazing into the red depths till
his eyes grew red in sympathy, until the bell for dinner began to peal
through the silent winter air. Mr. Tottenham had come home, and was
visible at the door in evening costume, refreshed and warmed after his
drive, when Harry, half-blind, rushed out to make a hasty toilette. His
distracted looks made his host wonder.
"I hope you are not letting that boy get into mischief," he said to his
wife.
"Mischief! what mischief could he get into here?" Lady Mary replied,
with a smile; and then they began to talk on very much more important
matters--on Herr Hartstong's visit, and the preparations at the Shop,
which were now complete.
"I expect you to show a good example, and to treat my people like
friends," said Mr. Tottenham.
"Oh, friends!--am not I the head shopwoman?" asked Lady Mary, laughing.
"You may be sure I intend to appear so."
The entertainment was to take place on the next evening, after the
botanical lecture at Harbour Green. It was, indeed, likely to be an
exciting day, with so much going on.
And when the people at Tottenham's went to dinner, the Murrays had tea,
for which they were all quite ready after the sharp evening air. "You
were wrong to speak about your housekeeping, and all that," the doctor
said, in the mildest of accents, and with no appearance of suspicion,
for in the bosom of his family he feared no criticism. "Remember always,
Margaret, that people take you at your own estimate. It does not do to
let yourself down."
"And it does not do to set yourself up, beyond what you can support,"
said Margaret. "We are not rich folk, and we must not give ourselves
airs. And oh, Charles, one thing I wanted to say. If you wouldn't say
ladyship--at least, not often. No one else seems to do it, except the
servants. Don't be angry. I watch always to see what people say."
"I hope I know what to say as well as anyone," said the doctor, with
momentary offence; but, nevertheless, he made a private note of it,
having confidence in his sister's keen observation. Altogether, the
start at Harbour Green had been very successful, and it was not
wonderful if both Dr. Charles and his sister felt an inward exhilaration
in such a prosperous commencement of their new life.
CHAPTER VIII.
The Entertainment at the Shop.
The botanical lecture passed off very well indeed, and was productive of
real and permanent advantage to Harbour Green, by giving to Myra
Witherington a totally new study of character. She talked so completely
like Herr Hartstong for the rest of the day, that even her mother was
deceived, and would not enter the drawing-room till she had changed her
cap, in consideration of the totally new voice which she heard
proceeding from within. Strange to say, Harry Thornleigh, who last time
had been so contemptuous, had now thrown himself most cordially into
Lady Mary's plans, so cordially that he made of himself a missionary to
gain new converts for her.
"I will take those books you promised to Mrs. Smith, and try to persuade
her to come to the lecture. Is there anyone else I can look up for you,
Aunt Mary?" said this reformed character.
"Do, Harry; go to the Red House, and to the Rectory, and tell them
half-past twelve precisely. We did not quite settle upon the hour," said
Lady Mary. "And you might ask Sissy Witherington to send round to some
of the other people; she knows them all. You will meet us at the
schoolroom? So many thanks!"
"I shall be there," said Harry, cheerily, marching off with his books
under his arm.
If Lady Mary had not been so busy, no doubt she would have asked herself
the cause of this wonderful conversion; but with a lecture to attend to
in the morning, and an entertainment at night, what time had she for
lesser matters? And she had to send some servants to Berkeley Square to
get the rooms ready, as the family were to dine and sleep there;
altogether she had a great deal upon her hands. Harry had his
difficulties, too, in getting safely out of the house without Phil, who,
abandoned by Edgar, and eluded by his cousin, was in a very restless
state of mind, and had determined this morning, of all others, not to be
left behind. Harry, however, inspired by the thoughts of Mrs. Smith, was
too clever for Phil, and shot down the avenue like an arrow, with his
books under his arm, happy in his legitimate and perfectly correct
errand, to which no one could object. He left his message with the
Witheringtons on his way, for he was too happy not to be virtuous, poor
fellow. It damped his ardour dreadfully to find that no plea he could
put forth would induce Margaret to go to the lecture.
"I don't take any interest in botany," she said, "and I have no time for
it, to keep it up if I began."
"What of that," said Harry; "do you think I take an interest in
botany?"
"But you are a great florist, Mr. Thornleigh," she said, demurely. It
was some time before he remembered his pretence about the flowers.
"I shall bring you some specimens of my skill to-morrow," he said,
laughing, with a flush of pleasure. At least, if she would not come
to-day, here was an excuse for making another day happy--and as a lover
lives upon the future, Harry was partially consoled for his
disappointment. I don't think he got much good of the lecture; perhaps
no one got very much good. Ellen Gregory did not come, for botany was
not in her list of subjects for the pupil-teachers' examination, and
Lady Mary did not take any notes, but only lent the students the
encouragement of her presence; for she could not, notwithstanding what
she had said, quite disabuse her own mind from the impression that this
was a young-lady-like science, and not one of those which train the mind
to thought. So that on the whole, as I have said, the chief result was
that Myra "got up" Herr Hartstong to the great delight of all the
light-minded population at Harbour Green, who found the professor much
more amusing in that audacious young mimic's rendering than in his own
person.
In the afternoon the whole party went to London. "Everybody is going,"
said little Molly, in huge excitement. "It is like the pantomime; and
Phil is to do the cheering. Shouldn't you like to be him, Harry? It will
almost be as good as being on the stage oneself."
"Don't talk of things you don't understand," said Phil, who was too
grand to be spoken to familiarly, and whose sense of responsibility was
almost too heavy for perfect happiness. "I sha'n't cheer unless they
deserve it. But the rehearsal was awful fun," he added, unbending.
"You'll say you never saw anything better, if they do half as well
to-night."
Tottenham's was gorgeous to behold when the guests began to arrive. The
huge central hall, with galleries all round it, and handsome carpeted
stairs leading on every hand up to the galleries, was the scene of the
festivity. On ordinary occasions the architectural splendour of this
hall was lost, in consequence of the crowd of tables, and goods, and
customers which filled it. It had been cleared, however, for the
entertainment. Rich shawls in every tint of softened colour were hung
about, coloured stuffs draped the galleries, rich carpets covered the
floors; no palace could have been more lavish in its decorations, and
few palaces could have employed so liberally those rich Oriental fabrics
which transcend all others in combinations of colour. Upstairs, in the
galleries, were the humbler servants of the establishment, porters,
errand boys, and their relatives; down below were "the young ladies" and
"the gentlemen" of Tottenham's occupying the seats behind their patrons
in clouds of white muslin and bright ribbons.
"Very nice-looking people, indeed," the Duchess of Middlemarch said, as
she came in on Mr. Tottenham's arm, putting up her eyeglass. Many of the
young ladies curtseyed to Her Grace in sign of personal acquaintance,
for she was a constant patroness of Tottenham's. "I hope you haven't
asked any of my sons," said the great lady, looking round her with
momentary nervousness.
Mr. Tottenham himself was as pleased as if he had been exhibiting "a
bold tenantry their country's pride" to his friends. "They are
nice-looking, though I say it as shouldn't," he said, "and many of them
as good as they look." He was so excited that he began to give the
Duchess an account of their benefit societies, and saving banks, and
charities, to which Her Grace replied with many benevolent signs of
interest, though I am afraid she did not care any more about them than
Miss Annetta Baker did about the lecture. She surveyed the company, as
they arrived, through her double eyeglass, and watched "poor little Mary
Horton that was, she who married the shopkeeper," receiving her guests,
with her pretty children at her side. It was very odd altogether, but
then, the Hortons were always odd, she said to herself--and graciously
bowed her head as Mr. Tottenham paused, and said, "How very admirable!"
with every appearance of interest.
A great many other members of the aristocracy shared Her Grace's
feelings, and many of them were delighted by the novelty, and all of
them gazed at the young ladies and gentlemen of the establishment as if
they were animals of some unknown description. I don't think the
gentlemen and the young ladies were at all offended. They gazed too with
a kindred feeling, and made notes of the dresses, and watched the
manners and habits of "the swells" with equal curiosity and admiration.
The young ladies in the linen and in the cloak and mantle department
were naturally more excited about the appearance of the fine ladies from
a book-of-fashion point of view than were the dressmakers and milliners,
who sat, as it were, on the permanent committee of the "Mode," and knew
"what was to be worn." But even they were excited to find themselves in
the same room with so many dresses from Paris, with robes which Wrth
had once tried on, and ribbons which Elise had touched. I fear all these
influences were rather adverse to the due enjoyment of the trial scene
from Pickwick, with Miss Robinson in the part of Serjeant Buzfuz. The
fine people shrugged their shoulders, and lifted their eyebrows at each
other, and cheered ironically now and then with twitters of laughter;
and the small people were too intent upon the study of their betters to
do justice to the performance. Phil, indeed, shrieked with laughter,
knowing all the points, with the exactitude of a showman, and led his
claque vigorously; but I think, on the whole, the employs of
Tottenham's would have enjoyed this part of the entertainment more had
their attention been undisturbed. After the first part of the
performances was over, there was an interval for "social enjoyment;" and
it was now that the gorgeous footmen appeared with the ices, about whom
Mr. Tottenham had informed his children. Lady Mary, perhaps, required a
little prompting from her husband before she withdrew herself from the
knot of friends who had collected round her, and addressed herself
instead to the young ladies of the shop.
"Must we go and talk to them, Mr. Tottenham? Will they like it? or shall
we only bore them?" asked the fine ladies.
The Duchess of Middlemarch was, as became her rank, the first to set
them the example. She went up with her double eyeglass in her hand to a
group of the natives who were standing timorously together--two young
ladies and a gentleman.
"It has been very nice, has it not," said Her Grace; "quite clever.
Will you get me an ice, please? and tell me who was the young woman--the
young lady who acted so well? I wonder if I have seen her when I have
been here before."
"Yes, Your Grace," said one of the young ladies. "She is in the fancy
department, Miss Robinson. Her father is at the head of the cloaks and
mantles, Your Grace."
"She did very nicely," said the Duchess, condescendingly, taking the ice
from the young man whom she had so honoured. "Thanks, this will do very
well, I don't want to sit down. It is very kind of Mr. Tottenham, I am
sure, to provide this entertainment for you. Do you all live here
now?--and how many people may there be in the establishment? He told me,
but I forget."
It was the gentleman who supplied the statistics, while the Duchess put
up her eyeglass, and once more surveyed the assembly. "You must make up
quite a charming society," she said; "like a party in a country-house.
And you have nice sitting-rooms for the evening, and little musical
parties, eh? as so many can sing, I perceive; and little dances,
perhaps?"
"Oh no, Your Grace," said one of the young ladies, mournfully. "We have
practisings sometimes, when anything is coming off."
"And we have an excellent library, Your Grace," said the gentleman, "and
all the new books. There is a piano in the ladies' sitting-room, and we
gentlemen have chess and so forth, and everything extremely nice."
"And a great deal of gossip, I suppose," said Her Grace; "and I hope you
have chaperons to see that there is not too much flirting."
"Oh, flirting!" said all three, in a chorus. "There is a sitting-room
for the ladies, and another for the gentlemen," the male member of the
party said, somewhat primly, for he was one of the class of
superintendents, vulgarly called shopwalkers, and he knew his place.
"Oh--h!" said the Duchess, putting down her eyeglass; "then it must be a
great deal less amusing than I thought!"
"It was quite necessary, I assure you, Your Grace," said the gentleman;
and the two young ladies who had been tittering behind their fans, gave
him each a private glance of hatred. They composed their faces, however,
as Mr. Tottenham came up, called by the Duchess from another group.
"You want me, Duchess?" how fine all Tottenham's who were within
hearing, felt at this--especially the privileged trio, to whom she had
been talking, "Duchess!" that sublime familiarity elevated them all in
the social scale.
"Nothing is perfect in this world," said Her Grace, with a sigh. "I
thought I had found Utopia; but even your establishment is not all it
might be. Why aren't they all allowed to meet, and sing, and flirt, and
bore each other every evening, as people do in a country house?"
"Come, Duchess, and look at my shawls," said Mr. Tottenham, with a
twinkle out of his grey eyes. Her Grace accepted the bait, and sailed
away, leaving the young ladies in a great flutter. A whole knot of them
collected together to hear what had happened, and whisper over it in
high excitement.
"I quite agree with the Duchess," said Miss Lockwood, loud enough to be
heard among the fashionables, as she sat apart and fanned herself, like
any fine lady. Her handsome face was almost as pale as ivory, her cheeks
hollow. Charitable persons said, in the house, that she was in a
consumption, and that it was cruel to stop her duet with Mr. Watson, and
to inquire into her past life, when, poor soul, it was clear to see that
she would soon be beyond the reach of all inquiries. It was the
Robinsons who had insisted upon it chiefly--Mr. Robinson, who was at the
head of the department, and who had daughters of his own, about whom he
was very particular. His youngest was under Miss Lockwood, in the shawls
and mantles, and that was why he was so inexorable pursuing the matter;
though why he should make objections to Miss Lockwood's propriety, and
yet allow Jemima to act in public, as she had just done, was more than
the shop could make out. Miss Lockwood sat by herself, having thus been
breathed upon by suspicion; but no one in the place was more
conspicuous. She had an opera cloak of red, braided with gold, which the
young ladies knew to be quite a valuable article, and her glossy dark
hair was beautifully dressed, and her great paleness called attention to
her beauty. She kept her seat, not moving when the others did, calling
to her anyone she wanted, and indeed, generally taking upon herself the
rle of fine lady. And partly from sympathy for her illness, partly
from disapproval of what was called the other side, the young ladies and
gentlemen of Tottenham's stood by her. When she said, "I agree with the
Duchess," everybody looked round to see who it was that spoke.
When the pause for refreshments was over, Mr. Tottenham led Her Grace
back to her place, and the entertainment recommenced. The second part
was simply music. Mr. Watson gave his solo on the cornet, and another
gentleman of the establishment accompanied one of the young ladies on
the violin, and then they sang a number of part songs, which was the
best part of the programme. The excitement being partially over, the
music was much better attended to than the Trial Scene from Pickwick;
and all the fine people, used to hear Joachim play, or Patti sing,
listened with much gracious restraint of their feelings. It had been
intended at first that the guests and the employs should sup
together, Mr. Robinson offering his arm to Lady Mary, and so on. But at
the last moment this arrangement had been altered, and the visitors had
wine and cake, and sandwiches and jellies in one room, while the
establishment sat down to a splendid table in another, and ate and
drank, and made speeches and gave toasts to their hearts' content,
undisturbed by any inspection. What a place it was! The customers went
all over it, conducted by Mr. Tottenham and his assistants through the
endless warehouses, and through the domestic portion of the huge house,
while the young ladies and gentlemen of Tottenham's were at supper. The
visitors went to the library, and to the sitting-rooms, and even to the
room which was used as a chapel, and which was full of rough wooden
chairs, like those in a French country church, and decorated with
flowers. This curious adjunct to the shop stood open, with faint lights
burning, and the spring flowers shedding faint odours.
"I did not know you had been so High Church, Mr. Tottenham," said the
Duchess. "I was not prepared for this."
"Oh, this is Saint Gussy's chapel," cried Phil, who was too much excited
to be kept silent. "We all call it Saint Gussy's. There is service every
day, and it is she who puts up the flowers. Ah, ah!"
Phil stopped suddenly, persuaded thereto by a pressure on the arm, and
saw Edgar standing by him in the crowd. There were so many, and they
were all crowding so close upon each other, that his exclamation was
not noticed. Edgar had been conjoining to the other business which
detained him in town a great deal of work about the entertainment, and
he had appeared with the other guests in the evening, but had been met
by Lady Augusta with such a face of terror, and hurried anxious
greeting, that he had withdrawn himself from the assembly, feeling his
own heart beat rather thick and fast at the thought, perhaps, of meeting
Gussy without warning in the midst of this crowd. He had kept himself in
the background all the evening, and now he stopped Phil, to send a
message to his father.
"Say that he will find me in his room when he wants me; and don't use a
lady's name so freely, or tell family jokes out of the family," he said
to the boy, who was ashamed of himself. Edgar's mind was full of new
anxieties of which the reader shall hear presently. The Entertainment
was a weariness to him, and everything connected with it. He turned away
when he had given the message, glad to escape from the riot--the groups
trooping up and down the passages, and examining the rooms as if they
were a settlement of savages--the Duchess sweeping on in advance on Mr.
Tottenham's arm, with her double eye-glass held up. He turned away
through an unfrequented passage, dimly lighted and silent, where there
was nothing to see, and where nobody came. In the distance the joyful
clatter of the supper-table, where all the young ladies and gentlemen of
the establishment were enjoying themselves came to his ears on one
side--while the soft laughter and hum of voices on the other, told of
the better bred crowd who were finding their way again round other
staircases and corridors to the central hall. It is impossible, I
suppose, to hear the sounds of festive enjoyment with which one has
nothing to do, and from which one has withdrawn thus sounding from the
distance without some symptoms of a gentle misanthropy, and that sense
of superiority to common pursuits and enjoyments which affords
compensation to those who are left out in the cold, whether in great
things or small things. Edgar's heart was heavy, and he felt it more
heavy in consequence of the merry-making. Among all these people, so
many of whom he had known, was there one that retained any kind thought
of him--one that would not, like Lady Augusta, the kindest of them all,
have felt a certain fright at his re-appearance, as of one come from the
dead? Alas, he ought to have remained dead, when socially he was so.
Edgar felt, at least, his resurrection ought not to have been here.
With this thought in his mind, he turned a dim corner of the white
passage, where a naked gaslight burned dimly. He was close to Mr.
Tottenham's room, where he meant to remain until he was wanted. With a
start of surprise, he saw that some one else was in the passage coming
the other way, one of the ladies apparently of the fashionable party.
The passage was narrow, and Edgar stood aside to let her pass. She was
wrapped in a great white cloak, the hood half over her head, and came
forward rapidly, but uncertain, as if she had lost herself. Just before
they met, she stopped short, and uttered a low cry.
Had not his heart told him who it was? Edgar stood stock still, scarcely
breathing, gazing at her. He had wondered how this meeting would come
about, for come it must, he knew--and whether he would be calm and she
calm, as if they had met yesterday? Yet when the real emergency arrived
he was quite unprepared for it. He did not seem able to move, but gazed
at her as if all his heart had gone into his eyes, incapable of more
than the mere politeness of standing by to let her pass, which he had
meant to do when he thought her a stranger. The difficulty was all
thrown upon her. She too had made a pause. She looked up at him with a
tremulous smile and a quivering lip. She put out her hands half timidly,
half eagerly; her colour changed from red to pale, and from pale to red.
"Have you forgotten me, then?" she said.
CHAPTER IX.
Miss Lockwood's Story.
I am obliged to go back a few days, that the reader may be made aware of
the causes which detained Edgar, and of the business which had occupied
his mind, mingled with all the frivolities of the Entertainment, during
his absence. Annoyance, just alloyed with a forlorn kind of amusement,
was his strongest sentiment, when he found himself appointed by his
patron to be a kind of father-confessor to Miss Lockwood, to ascertain
her story, and take upon himself her defence, if defence was possible.
Why should he be selected for such a delicate office? he asked; and when
he found himself seated opposite to the young lady from the cloak and
shawl department in Mr. Tottenham's room, his sense of the incongruity
of his position became more and more embarrassing. Miss Lockwood's face
was not of a common kind. The features were all fine, even refined, had
the mind been conformable; but as the mind was not of a high order, the
fine face took an air of impertinence, of self-opinion, and utter
indifference to the ideas or feelings of others, which no coarse
features could have expressed so well; the elevation of her head was a
toss, the curl of her short upper lip a sneer. She placed herself on a
chair in front of Mr. Tottenham's writing-table, at which Edgar sat, and
turned her profile towards him, and tucked up her feet on a foot-stool.
She had a book in her hand, which she used sometimes as a fan, sometimes
to shield her face from the fire, or Edgar's eyes, when she found them
embarrassing. But it was he who was embarrassed, not Miss Lockwood. It
cost him a good deal of trouble to begin his interrogatory.
"You must remember," he said, "that I have not thrust myself into this
business, but that it is by your own desire--though I am entirely at a
loss to know why."
"Of course you are," said Miss Lockwood. "It is one of the things that
no man can be expected to understand--till he knows. It's because we've
got an object in common, sir, you and me----"
"An object in common?"
"Yes; perhaps you're a better Christian than I am, or perhaps you
pretend to be; but knowing what you've been, and how you've fallen to
what you are, I don't think it's in human nature that you shouldn't feel
the same as me."
"What I've been, and how I've fallen to what I am!" said Edgar, smiling
at the expression with whimsical amazement and vexation. "What is the
object in life which you suppose me to share?"
"To spite the Ardens!" cried the young lady from the mantle department,
with sudden vigour and animation. Her eyes flashed, she clasped her
hands together, and laughed and coughed--the laughter hard and
mirthless, the cough harder still, and painful to hear. "Don't you
remember what I said to you? All my trouble, all that has ever gone
against me in the world, and the base stories they're telling you
now--all came along of the Ardens; and now Providence has thrown you in
my way, that has as much reason to hate them. I can't set myself right
without setting them wrong--and revenge is sweet. Arthur Arden shall rue
the day he ever set eyes on you or me!"
"Wait a little," said Edgar, bewildered. "In the first place, I don't
hate the Ardens, and I don't want to injure them, and I hope, when we
talk it over, you may change your mind. What has Arthur Arden done to
you?"
"That's my story," said Miss Lockwood, and then she made a short pause.
"Do you know the things that are said about me?" she asked. "They say in
the house that I have had a baby. That's quite true. I would not deny it
when I was asked; I didn't choose to tell a lie. They believed me fast
enough when what I said was to my own disadvantage; but when I told the
truth in another way, because it was to my advantage, they say--Prove
it. I can't prove it without ruining other folks, or I'd have done it
before now; but I was happy enough as I was, and I didn't care to ruin
others. Now, however, they've forced me to it, and thrown you in my
way."
"For heaven's sake," cried Edgar, "don't mix me up with your scheme of
vengeance! What have I to do with it?" He was alarmed by the calm white
vehemence with which she spoke.
"Oh! not much with my part of the business," she said lightly. "This is
how it is: I'm married--excuse enough any day for what I'm charged with;
but they won't take my word, and I have to prove it. When I tell them
I'm only a widow in a kind of a way, they say to me, 'Produce your
husband,' and this is what I've got to do. Nearly ten years ago, Mr.
Earnshaw, if that is your name--are you listening to me?--I married
Arthur Arden; or, rather, Arthur Arden married me."
"Good God!" cried Edgar; he did not at first seem to take in the meaning
of the words, but only felt vaguely that he had received a blow. "You
are mad!" he said, after a pause, looking at her--"you are mad!"
"Not a bit; I am saner than you are, for I never would have given up a
fortune to him. I am the first Mrs. Arthur Arden, whoever the second may
be. He married me twice over, to make it more sure."
"Good God!" cried Edgar again; his countenance had grown whiter than
hers; all power of movement seemed to be taken out of him. "Prove this
horrible thing that you say--prove it! He never could be such a
villain!"
"Oh, couldn't he?--much you know about him! He could do worse things
than that, if worse is possible. You shall prove it yourself without me
stirring a foot. Listen, and I will tell you just how it was. When he
saw he couldn't have me in any other way, he offered marriage; I was
young then, and so was he, and I was excusable--I have always felt I
was excusable; for a handsomer man, or one with more taking ways--You
know him, that's enough. Well, not to make any more fuss than was
necessary, I proposed the registrar; but, if you please, he was a deal
too religious for that. 'Let's have some sort of parson,' he said,
'though he mayn't be much to look at.' We were married in the Methodist
chapel up on the way to Highgate. I'll tell you all about it--I'll give
you the name of the street and the date. It's up Camden Town way, not
far from the Highgate Road. Father and mother used to attend chapel
there."
"You were married--to Arthur Arden!" said Edgar; all the details were
lost upon him, for he had not yet grasped the fact--"married to Arthur
Arden! Is this what you mean to say?"
"Yes, yes, yes!" cried Miss Lockwood, in high impatience, waving the
book which she used as a fan--"that is what I meant to say; and there's
a deal more. You seem to be a slow sort of gentleman. I'll stop, shall
I, till you've got it well into your head?" she said, with a laugh.
The laugh, the mocking look, the devilish calm of the woman who was
expounding so calmly something which must bring ruin and despair upon a
family, and take name and fame from another woman, struck Edgar with
hot, mad anger.
"For God's sake, hold your tongue!" he cried, not knowing what he
said--"you will drive me mad!"
"I'm sure I don't see why," said Miss Lockwood--"why should it?--it
ain't anything to you. And to hold my tongue is the last thing I mean
to do. You know what I said; I'll go over it again to make quite sure."
Then, with a light laugh, she repeated word for word what she had
already said, throwing in descriptive touches about the Methodist chapel
and its pews.
"Father and mother had the third from the pulpit on the right-hand side.
I don't call myself a Methodist now; it stands in your way sometimes,
and the Church is always respectable; but I ought to like the
Methodists, for it was there it happened. You had better take down the
address and the day. I can tell you all the particulars."
Edgar did not know much about the law, but he had heard, at least, of
one ordinary formula.
"Have you got your marriage certificate?" he said.
"Oh! they don't have such things among the Methodists," said Miss
Lockwood. "Now I'll tell you about the second time--for it was done
twice over, to make sure. You remember all that was in the papers about
that couple who were first married in Ireland, and then in Scotland, and
turned out not to be married at all? We went off to Scotland, him and
me, for our wedding tour, and I thought I'd just make certain sure, in
case there should be anything irregular, you know. So when we were at
the hotel, I got the landlady in, and one of the men, and I said he was
my husband before them, and made them put their names to it. He was
dreadfully angry--so angry that I knew I had been right, and had seen
through him all the while, and that he meant to deceive me if he could;
but he couldn't deny it all of a sudden, in a moment, with the certainty
that he would be turned out of the house then and there if he did. I've
got that, if you like to call that a marriage certificate. They tell me
it's hard and fast in Scotch law."
"But we are in England," said Edgar, feebly. "I don't think Scotch law
tells here."
"Oh! it does, about a thing like this," said Miss Lockwood. "If I'm
married in Scotland, I can't be single in England, and marry again, can
I? Now that's my story. If his new wife hadn't have been so proud----"
"She is not proud," said Edgar, with a groan; "it is--her manner--she
does not mean it. And then she has been so petted and flattered all her
life. Poor girl! she has done nothing to you that you should feel so
unfriendly towards her."
"Oh! hasn't she?" said Miss Lockwood. "Only taken my place, that's all.
Lived in my house, and driven in my carriage, and had everything I ought
to have had--no more than that!"
Edgar was like a man stupefied. He stood holding his head with his
hands, feeling that everything swam around him. Miss Lockwood's
defender?--ah! no, but the defender of another, whose more than life was
assailed. This desperation at last made things clearer before him, and
taught him to counterfeit calm.
"It could not be she who drove you from him," he said, with all the
composure he could collect. "Tell me how it came about that you are
called Miss Lockwood, and have been here so long, if all you have told
me is true?"
"I won't say that it was not partly my fault," she replied, with a
complacent nod of her head. "After awhile we didn't get on--I was
suspicious of him from the first, as I've told you; I know he never
meant honest and right; and he didn't like being found out. Nobody as I
know of does. We got to be sick of each other after awhile. He was as
poor as Job; and he has the devil's own temper. If you think I was a
patient Grizel to stand that, you're very much mistaken. Ill-usage and
slavery, and nothing to live upon! I soon showed him as that wouldn't do
for me. The baby died," she added indifferently--"poor little thing, it
was a blessing that the Almighty took it! I fretted at first, but I felt
it was a deal better off than it could ever have been with me; and then
I took another situation. I had been in Grant and Robinson's before I
married, so as I didn't want to make a show of myself with them that
knew me, I took back my single name again. They are rather low folks
there, and I didn't stay long; and I found I liked my liberty a deal
better than studying his temper, and being left to starve, as I was with
him; so I kept on, now here, now there, till I came to Tottenham's. And
here I've never had nothing to complain of," said Miss Lockwood, "till
some of these prying women found out about the baby. I made up my mind
to say nothing about who I was, seeing circumstances ain't favourable.
But I sha'n't deny it; why should I deny it? it ain't for my profit to
deny it. Other folks may take harm, but I can't; and when I saw you,
then I felt that the right moment had come, and that I must speak."
"Why did not you speak before he was married?--had you no feeling that,
if you were safe, another woman was about to be ruined?" said Edgar,
bitterly. "Why did you not speak then?"
"Am I bound to take care of other women?" said Miss Lockwood. "I had
nobody to take care of me; and I took care of myself--why couldn't she
do the same? She was a lady, and had plenty of friends--I had nobody to
take care of me."
"But it would have been to your own advantage," said Edgar. "How do you
suppose anyone can believe that you neglected to declare yourself Arthur
Arden's wife at the time when it would have been such a great thing for
you, and when he was coming into a good estate, and could make his wife
a lady of importance? You are not indifferent to your own comfort--why
did you not speak then?"
"I pleased myself, I suppose," she said, tossing her head; then added,
with matter-of-fact composure, "Besides, I was sick of him. He was never
the least amusing, and the most fault-finding, ill-tempered--One's
spelling, and one's looks, and one's manners, and one's dress--he was
never satisfied. Then," she went on, sinking her voice--"I don't deny
the truth--I knew he'd never take me home and let people know I was his
real wife. All I could have got out of him would have been an allowance,
to live in some hole and corner. I preferred my freedom to that, and
the power of getting a little amusement. I don't mind work, bless
you--not work of this kind--it amuses me; and if I had been left in
peace here when I was comfortable, I shouldn't have interfered--I should
have let things take their chance."
"In all this," said Edgar, feeling his throat dry and his utterance
difficult, "you consider only yourself, no one else."
"Who else should I consider?" said Miss Lockwood. "I should like to know
who else considered me? Not a soul. I had to take care of myself, and I
did. Why should not his other wife have her wits about her as well as
me?"
Then there was a pause. Edgar was too much broken down by this
disclosure, too miserable to speak; and she sat holding up the book
between her face and the fire, with a flush upon her pale cheeks,
sometimes fanning herself, her nose in the air, her finely-cut profile
inspired by impertinence and worldly selfishness, till it looked ugly to
the disquieted gazer. Few women could have been so handsome, and yet
looked so unhandsome. As he looked at her, sickening with the sight,
Edgar felt bitterly that this woman was indeed Arthur Arden's true
mate--they matched each other well. But Clare, his sister--Clare, whom
there had been no one to guard--who, rich in friends as she was, had no
brother, no guardian to watch over her interests--poor Clare! The only
thing he seemed able to do for her now was to prove her shame, and
extricate her, if he could extricate her, from the terrible falseness
of her position. His heart ached so that it gave him a physical pain. He
had kept up no correspondence with her whom he had looked upon during
all the earlier part of his life as his sister, and whom he felt in his
very heart to be doubly his sister the moment that evil came in her way.
The thing for him to consider now was what he could do for her, to save
her, if possible--though how she could be saved, he knew not, as the
story was so circumstantial, and apparently true. But, at all events, it
could not but be well for Clare that her enemy's cause was in her
brother's hands. Good for Clare!--would it be good for the other woman,
to whom he had promised to do justice? Edgar almost felt his heart stand
still as he asked himself this question. Justice--justice must be done,
in any case, there could be no doubt of that. If Clare's position was
untenable, she must not be allowed to go on in ignorance, for misery
even is better than dishonour. This was some comfort to him in his
profound and sudden wretchedness. Clare's cause, and that of this other,
were so far the same.
"I will undertake your commission," he said gravely; "but understand me
first. Instead of hating the Ardens, I would give my life to preserve my
sister, Mrs. Arden, from the shame and grief you are trying to bring
upon her. Of course, one way or another, I shall feel it my duty now to
verify what you say; but it is right to tell you that her interest is
the first thing I shall consider, not yours."
"Her interest!" cried Miss Lockwood, starting up in her chair. "Oh!
you poor, mean-spirited creature! Call yourself a man, and let yourself
be treated like a dog--that's your nature, is it? I suppose they've made
you a pension, or something, to keep you crawling and toadying. I
shouldn't wonder," she said, stopping suddenly, "if you were to offer me
a good round sum to compromise the business, or an allowance for
life--?"
"I shall do nothing of the kind," said Edgar, quietly. She stared at him
for a moment, panting--and then, in the effort to speak, was seized upon
by a violent fit of coughing, which shook her fragile figure, and
convulsed her suddenly-crimsoned face. "Can I get you anything?" he
asked, rising with an impulse of pity. She shook her head, and waved to
him with her hand to sit down again. Does the reader remember how
Christian in the story had vile thoughts whispered into his ear, thrown
into his mind, which were none of his? Profoundest and truest of
parables! Into Edgar's mind, thrown there by some devil, came a wish and
a hope; he did not originate them, but he had to undergo them, writhing
within himself with shame and horror. He wished that she might die, that
Clare might thus be saved from exposure, at least from outward ruin,
from the stigma upon herself and upon her children, which nothing else
could avert. The wish ran through him while he sat helpless, trying with
all the struggling powers of his mind to reject it. Few of us, I
suspect, have escaped a similar experience. It was not his doing, but
he had to bear the consciousness of this inhuman thought.
When Miss Lockwood had struggled back to the power of articulation, she
turned to him again, with an echo of her jaunty laugh.
"They say I'm in a consumption," she said; "don't you believe it. I'll
see you all out, mind if I don't. We're a long-lived family. None of us
ever were known to have anything the matter with our chests."
"Have you spoken to a doctor?" said Edgar, with so deep a remorseful
compunction that it made his tone almost tender in kindness.
"Oh! the doctor--he speaks to me!" she said. "I tell the young ladies
he's fallen in love with me. Oh! that ain't so unlikely neither! Men as
good have done it before now; but I wouldn't have anything to say to
him," she continued, with her usual laugh. "I don't make any brag of it,
but I never forget as I'm a married woman. I don't mind a little
flirtation, just for amusement; but no man has ever had it in his power
to brag that he's gone further with me."
Then there was a pause, for disquiet began to resume its place in
Edgar's mind, and the poor creature before him had need of rest to
regain her breath. She opened the book she held in her hand, and pushed
to him across the table some written memoranda.
"There's where my chapel is as I was married in," she said, "and
there's--it's nothing but a copy, so, if you destroy it, it won't do me
any harm--the Scotch certificate. They were young folks that signed it,
no older than myself, so be sure you'll find them, if you want to.
There, I've given you all that's needed to prove what I say, and if you
don't clear me, I'll tell the Master, that's all, and he'll do it, fast
enough! Your fine Mrs. Arden, forsooth, that has no more right to be
Mrs. Arden than you had to be Squire, won't get off, don't you think it,
for now my blood's up. I know what Arthur will do," she cried, getting
excited again. "He's a man of sense, and a man of the world, he is.
He'll come to me on his knees, and offer a good big lump of money, or a
nice allowance. Oh! I know him! He ain't a poor, mean-spirited cur, to
lick the hand that cuffs him, or to go against his own interest, like
you."
Here another fit of coughing came on, worse than the first. Edgar,
compassionate, took up the paper, and left the room.
"I am afraid Miss Lockwood is ill. Will you send some one to her?" he
said, to the first young lady he met.
"Hasn't she a dreadful cough? And she won't do anything for it, or take
any care of herself. I'll send one of the young ladies from her own
department," said this fine personage, rustling along in her black silk
robes. Mr. Watson was hovering near, to claim Edgar's attention, about
some of the arrangements for the approaching festivity.
"Mr. Tottenham bade me say, sir, if you'd kindly step this way, into the
hall," said the walking gentleman.
Poor Edgar! if he breathed a passing anathema upon enlightened schemes
and disciples of social progress, I do not think that anyone need be
surprised.
CHAPTER X.
A Plunge into the Maze.
"Her plea is simply that she is married--that seems all there is to
say."
"I am aware she says that," said Mr. Tottenham. "I hope to heaven she
can prove it, Earnshaw, and end this tempest in a tea-cup! I am sick of
the whole affair! Has her husband deserted her, or is he dead, or what
has become of him? I hope she gave you some proofs."
"I must make inquiries before I can answer," said Edgar. "By some
miserable chance friends of my own are involved. I must get at the
bottom of it. Her husband--if he is her husband--has married again; in
his own rank--a lady in whom I am deeply interested----"
"My dear fellow!" said Mr. Tottenham, "what a business for you! Did the
woman know, confound her? There, I don't often speak rashly, but some of
these women, upon my honour, would try the patience of a saint! I
daresay it's all a lie. That sort of person cares no more for a lie!
I'll pack her off out of the establishment, and we'll think of it no
more."
"Pardon me, I must think of it, and follow it out," said Edgar; "it is
too serious to be neglected. Altogether independent of this woman, a
lady's--my friend's happiness, her reputation, perhaps her life--for how
could she outlive name and fame, and love and confidence?" he said,
suddenly feeling himself overcome by the horrible suggestion. "It looks
like preferring my own business to yours, but I must see to this first."
"Go, go, my dear Earnshaw--never mind my business--have some money and
go!" cried Mr. Tottenham. "I can't tell you how grieved I am to have
brought you into this. Poor lady! poor lady!--I won't ask who it is. But
recollect they lie like the devil!--they don't mind what they say, like
you or me, who understand the consequences; they think of nothing beyond
the spite of the moment. I am in for three quarrels, and a resignation,
all because I want to please them!" cried the poor master of the great
shop, dolorously. He accompanied Edgar out to the private door,
continuing his plaint. "A nothing will do it," he said; "and they don't
care for what happens, so long as they indulge the temper of the moment.
To lose their employment, or their friends, or the esteem of those who
would try to help them in everything--all this is nought. I declare I
could almost cry like a baby when I think of it! Don't be cast down,
Earnshaw. More likely than not it's all a lie!"
"If I cannot get back this evening in time for you--" Edgar began.
"Never mind, never mind. Go to the Square. I'll tell them to have a room
ready for you. And take some money--nothing is to be done without
money. And, Earnshaw," lie added, calling after him some minutes later,
when Edgar was at the door, "on second thoughts, you won't say anything
to Mary about my little troubles? After all, the best of us have got our
tempers; perhaps I am injudicious, and expect too much. She has always
had her doubts about my mode of treatment. Don't, there's a good fellow,
betray to them at home that I lost my temper too!"
This little preliminary to the Entertainment was locked in Edgar's
bosom, and never betrayed to anyone. To tell the truth, his mind was
much too full of more important matters to think upon any such
inconsiderable circumstance; for he was not the Apostle of the Shop, and
had no scheme to justify and uphold in the eyes of all men and women.
Edgar, I fear, was not of the stuff of which social reformers are made.
The concerns of the individual were more important to him at all times
than those of the mass; and one human shadow crossing his way,
interested his heart and mind far beyond a mere crowd, though the crowd,
no doubt, as being multitudinous, must have been more important. Edgar
turned his back upon the establishment with, I fear, very little
Christian feeling towards Tottenham's, and all concerned with it--hating
the Entertainment, weary of Mr. Tottenham himself, and disgusted with
the strange impersonation of cruelty and selfishness which had just been
revealed to him in the form of a woman. He could not shut out from his
eyes that thin white face, so full of self, so destitute of any generous
feeling.
Such stories have been told before in almost every tone of sympathy and
reprobation; women betrayed have been wept in every language under
heaven, and their betrayer denounced, but what was there to lament
about, to denounce here? A woman sharp and clever to make the best of
her bargain; a man trying legal cheats upon her; two people drawn
together by some semblance of what is called passion, yet each watching
and scheming, how best, on either side, to outwit the other. Never was
tale of misery and despair so pitiful; for this was all baseness,
meanness, calculation on both hands. They were fitly matched, and it was
little worth any man's while to interfere between them--but, O heaven!
to think of the other fate involved in theirs. This roused Edgar to an
excitement which was almost maddening. To think that these two base
beings had wound into their miserable tangle the feet of Clare--that her
innocent life must pay the penalty for their evil lives, that she must
bear the dishonour while spotless from the guilt!
Edgar posted along the great London thoroughfare, through the
continually varying crowd of passers-by, absorbed in an agitation and
disquiet which drove all his own affairs out of his head. His own
affairs might involve much trouble and distress; but neither shame nor
guilt was in them. Heaven above! to think that guilt or shame could have
anything to do with Clare!
Now Clare had not been, at least at the last, a very good sister to
Edgar--she was not his sister at all, so far as blood went; and when
this had been discovered, and the homeliness of his real origin
identified, Clare had shrunk from him, notwithstanding that for all her
life, in childish fondness and womanly sympathy, she had loved him as
her only brother. Edgar had mournfully consented to a complete severance
between them. She had married his enemy; and he himself had sunk so much
out of sight that he had felt no further intercourse to be possible,
though his affectionate heart had felt it deeply. But as soon as he
heard of her danger, all his old love for his sister had sprung up in
Edgar's heart. He took back her name, as it were, into the number of
those sounds most familiar to him. "Clare," he said to himself, feeling
a thrill of renewed warmth go through him, mingled with poignant
pain--"Clare, my sister, my only sister, the sole creature in the world
that belongs to me!" Alas! she did not belong to Edgar any more than any
inaccessible princess; but in his heart this was what he felt. He pushed
his way through the full streets, with the air and the sentiment of a
man bound upon the most urgent business, seeing little on his way,
thinking of nothing but his object--the object in common which Miss
Lockwood had supposed him to have with herself. But Edgar did not even
remember that--he thought of nothing but Clare's comfort and well-being
which were concerned, and how it would be possible to confound her
adversaries, and save her from ignoble persecution. If he could keep it
from her knowledge altogether! But, alas! how could that be done? He
went faster and faster, driven by his thoughts.
The address Miss Lockwood had given him was in a small street off the
Hampstead Road. That strange long line of street, with here and there a
handful of older houses, a broader pavement, a bit of dusty garden, to
show the suburban air it once had possessed; its heterogeneous shops,
furniture, birdcages, perambulators, all kinds of out-of-the-way wares
fled past the wayfarer, taking wings to themselves, he thought. It is
not an interesting quarter, and Edgar had no time to give to any
picturesque or historical reminiscences. When he reached the little
street in which the chapel he sought was situated, he walked up on one
side and down on the other, expecting every moment to see the building
of which he was in search. A chapel is not a thing apt to disappear,
even in the changeful district of Camden Town. Rubbing his eyes, he went
up and down again, inspecting the close lines of mean houses. The only
break in the street was where two or three small houses, of a more
bilious brick than usual, whose outlines had not yet been toned down by
London soot and smoke, diversified the prospect. He went to a little
shop opposite this yellow patch upon the old grimy garment to make
inquiries.
"Chapel! there ain't no chapel hereabouts," said the baker, who was
filling his basket with loaves.
"Hold your tongue, John," said his wife, from the inner shop. "I'll set
you all right in a moment. There's where the chapel was, sir, right
opposite. There was a bit of a yard where they've built them houses. The
chapel is behind; but it ain't a chapel now. It's been took for an
infant school by our new Rector. Don't you see a little bit of an entry
at that open door? That's where you go in. But since it's been shut up
there's been a difference in the neighbourhood. Most of us is church
folks now."
"And does nothing remain of the chapel--nobody belonging to it, no books
nor records?" cried Edgar, suddenly brought to a standstill. The woman
looked at him surprised.
"I never heard as they had any books--more than the hymn-books, which
they took with them, I suppose. It's our new Rector as has bought it--a
real good man, as gives none of us no peace----"
"And sets you all on with your tongues," said her husband, throwing his
basket over his shoulder.
Edgar did not wait to hear the retort of the wife, and felt no interest
in the doings of the new Rector. He did not know what to do in this
unforeseen difficulty. He went across the road, and up the little entry,
and looked at the grimy building beyond, which was no great satisfaction
to his feelings. It was a dreary little chapel, of the most ordinary
type, cleared of its pews, and filled with the low benches and staring
pictures of an infant school, and looked as if it had been thrust up
into a corner by the little line of houses built across the scrap of
open space which had formerly existed in front of its doors. As he gazed
round him helplessly, another woman came up, who asked with bated breath
what he wanted.
"We're all church folks now hereabouts," she said; "but I don't mind
telling you, sir, as a stranger, I was always fond of the old chapel.
What preaching there used to be, to be sure!--dreadful rousing and
comforting! And it's more relief, like, to the mind, to say, 'Lord, ha'
mercy upon us!' or, 'Glory, glory!' or the like o' that, just when you
pleases, than at set times out o' a book. There's nothing most but
prayers here now. If you want any of the chapel folks, maybe I could
tell you. I've been in the street twenty years and more."
"I want to find out about a marriage that took place here ten years
ago," said Edgar.
"Marriage!" said the woman, shaking her head. "I don't recollect no
marriage. Preachings are one thing, and weddings is another. I don't
hold with weddings out of church. If there's any good in church--"
Edgar had to stop this exposition by asking after the "chapel-folks" to
whom she could direct him, and in answer was told of three tradesmen in
the neighbourhood who "held by the Methodys," one of whom had been a
deacon in the disused chapel. This was a carpenter, who could not be
seen till his dinner-hour, and on whom Edgar had to dance attendance
with very indifferent satisfaction; for the deacon's report was that the
chapel had never been, so far as he could remember, licensed for
marriages, and that none had taken place within it. This statement,
however, was flatly contradicted by the pork-butcher, whose name was the
next on his list, and who recollected to have heard that some one had
been married there just about the time indicated by Miss Lockwood.
Finally, Edgar lighted on an official who had been a local preacher in
the days of the chapel, and who was now a Scripture-reader, under the
sway of the new Rector, who had evidently turned the church and parish
upside-down. This personage had known something of the Lockwoods, and
was not disinclined--having ascertained that Edgar was a stranger, and
unlikely to betray any of his hankerings after the chapel--to gossip
about the little defunct community. Its books and records had, he said,
been removed, when it was closed, to some central office of the
denomination, where they would, no doubt, be shown on application. This
man was very anxious to give a great deal of information quite apart
from the matter in hand. He gave Edgar a sketch of the decay of the
chapel, in which, I fear, the young man took no interest, though it was
curious enough; and he told him about the Lockwoods, and about the
eldest daughter, who, he was afraid, had come to no good.
"She said as she was married, but nobody believed her. She was always a
flighty one," said the Scripture-reader.
This was all that Edgar picked up out of a flood of unimportant
communications. He could not even find any clue to the place where these
denominational records were kept, and by this time the day was too far
advanced to do more. Drearily he left the grimy little street, with its
damp pavements, its poor little badly-lighted shops and faint lamps, not
without encountering the new Rector in person, an omniscient personage,
who had already heard of his inquiries, and regarded him suspiciously,
as perhaps a "Methody" in disguise, planning the restoration of dissent
in a locality just purged from its taint. Edgar was too tired, too
depressed and down-hearted to be amused by the watchful look of the
muscular Christian, who saw in him a wolf prowling about the fold. He
made his way into the main road, and jumped into a hansom, and drove
down the long line of shabby, crowded thoroughfare, so mean and small,
yet so great and full of life. Those miles and miles of mean, monotonous
street, without a feature to mark one from another, full of crowds of
human creatures, never heard of, except as counting so many hundreds,
more or less, in the year's calendar of mortality--how strangely
impressive they become at last by mere repetition, mass upon mass, crowd
upon crowd, poor, nameless, mean, unlovely! Perhaps it was the general
weariness and depression of Edgar's whole being that brought this
feeling into his mind as he drove noisily, silently along between those
lines of faintly-lighted houses towards what is impertinently, yet
justly, called the habitable part of London. For one fair, bright path
in the social, as in the physical world, how many mean, and darkling,
and obscure!--how small the spot which lies known and visible to the
general eye!--how great the confused darkness all round! Such
reflections are the mere growth of weariness and despondency, but they
heighten the depression of which they are an evidence.
The whole of noisy, crowded London was as a wilderness to Edgar. He
drove to his club, where he had not been since the day when he met Mr.
Tottenham. So short a time ago, and yet how his life had altered in the
interval! He was no longer drifting vaguely upon the current, as he had
been doing. His old existence had caught at him with anxious hands.
Notwithstanding all the alterations of time, circumstances, and being,
he was at this moment not Edgar Earnshaw at all, but the Edgar Arden of
three years ago, caught back into the old sphere, surrounded by the old
thoughts. Such curious vindications of the unchangeableness of
character, the identity of being, which suddenly seize upon a man, and
whirl him back in a moment, defying all external changes, into his old,
his unalterable self, are among the strangest things in humanity. Dizzy
with the shock he had received, harassed by anxiety, worn out by
unsuccessful effort, Edgar felt the world swim round with him, and
scarcely could answer to himself who he was. Had all the Lockwood
business been a dream? Was it a dream that he had been as a stranger for
three long years to Clare, his sister--to Gussy, his almost bride? And
yet his mind at this moment was as full of their images as if no
interval had been.
After he had dined and refreshed himself, he set to work with, I
think,--notwithstanding his anxiety, the first shock of which was now
over,--a thrill of conscious energy, and almost pleasure in something to
do, which was so much more important than those vague lessons to Phil,
or vaguer studies in experimental philosophy, to which his mind had
been lately turned. To be here on the spot, ready to work for Clare when
she was assailed, was something to be glad of, deeply as the idea of
such an assault upon her had excited and pained him. And at the same
time as his weariness wore off, and the first excitement cooled down, he
began to feel himself more able to realize the matter in all its
particulars, and see the safer possibilities. It began to appear to him
likely enough that all that could be proved was Arthur Arden's villainy,
a subject which did not much concern him, which had no novelty in it,
and which, though Clare was Arthur Arden's wife, could not affect her
more now than it had done ever since she married him. Indeed, if it was
but this, there need be no necessity for communicating it to Clare at
all. It was more probable, when he came to think of it, that an educated
and clever man should be able to outwit a dressmaker girl, however
deeply instructed in the laws of marriage by novels and causes
clbres, than that she should outwit him; and in this case there was
nothing that need ever be made known to Clare.
Edgar was glad, and yet I don't know that a certain disappointment,
quite involuntary and unawares, did not steal into his mind with this
thought; for he had begun to cherish an idea of seeing his sister, of
perhaps resuming something of his old intercourse with her, and at least
of being known to have worked for and defended her. These thoughts,
however, were but the secondary current in his mind, while the working
part of it was planning a further enterprise for the morrow. He got the
directory, and, after considerable trouble, found out from it the names
and addresses of certain officials of the Wesleyan body, to whom he
could go in search of the missing registers of the Hart Street
Chapel--if registers there were--or who could give him definite and
reliable information, in face of the conflicting testimony he had
already received, as to whether marriages had ever been celebrated in
it.
Edgar knew, I suppose, as much as other men generally do about the
ordinary machinery of society, but he did not know where to lay his hand
on any conclusive official information about the Hart Street Chapel,
whether it had ever been licenced, or had any legal existence as a place
of worship, any more than--you or I would, dear reader, were we in a
similar difficulty. Who knows anything about such matters? He had lost a
day already in the merest A B C of preliminary inquiry, and no doubt
would lose several more.
Then he took out the most important of Miss Lockwood's papers, which he
had only glanced at as yet. It was dated from a small village in the
Western Highlands, within reach, as he knew, of Loch Arroch, and was a
certificate, signed by Helen Campbell and John Mactaggart, that Arthur
Arden and Emma Lockwood had that day, in their presence, declared
themselves to be man and wife. Edgar's knowledge of such matters had, I
fear, been derived entirely from novels and newspaper reports, and he
read over the document, which was alarmingly explicit and
straightforward, with a certain panic. He said to himself that there
were no doubt ways in law by which to lessen the weight of such an
attestation, or means of shaking its importance; but it frightened him
just as he was escaping from his first fright, and brought back all his
excitement and alarm.
He did not go to Berkeley Square, as Mr. Tottenham had recommended, but
to his old lodgings, where he found a bed with difficulty, and where
once more his two lives seemed to meet in sharp encounter. But his head
by this time was too full of schemes for to-morrow to permit of any
personal speculation; he was far, as yet, from seeing any end to his
undertaking, and it was impossible to tell what journeys, what
researches might be still before him.
CHAPTER XI.
In the Depths.
Next morning he went first to his old lawyer, in whom he had confidence,
and having copied the certificate, carefully changing the names,
submitted it to him. Mr. Parchemin declared that he knew nothing of
Scotch law, but shook his head, and hoped there was nothing very
unpleasant in the circumstances, declaring vehemently that it was a
shame and disgrace that such snares should be spread for the unwary on
the other side of the border. Was it a disgrace that Arthur Arden should
not have been protected in Scotland, as in England, from the
quick-wittedness of the girl whom he had already cheated and meant to
betray? Edgar felt that there might be something to be said on both
sides of the question, as he left his copy in Mr. Parchemin's hands, who
undertook to consult a Scotch legal authority on the question; then he
went upon his other business. I need not follow him through his manifold
and perplexing inquiries, or inform the reader how he was sent from
office to office, and from secretary to secretary, or with what loss of
time and patience his quest was accompanied. After several days' work,
however, he ascertained that the chapel in Hart Street had indeed been
licensed, but only used once or twice for marriages, and that no record
of any such marriage as that which he was in search of could be found
anywhere. A stray record of a class-meeting which Emma Lockwood had been
admonished for levity of demeanour, was the sole mention of her to be
found; and though the officials admitted a certain carelessness in the
preservation of books belonging to an extinct chapel, they declared it
to be impossible that such a fact could have been absolutely ignored.
There was, indeed, a rumour in the denomination that a local preacher
had been found to have taken upon himself to perform a marriage, for
which he had been severely reprimanded; but as he had been possessed of
no authority to make such a proceeding legal, no register had been made
of the fact, and only the reprimanded was inscribed on the books of the
community. This was the only opening for even a conjecture as to the
truth of Miss Lockwood's first story. If the second could only have been
dissipated as easily!
Edgar's inquiries among the Wesleyan authorities lasted, as I have said,
several days, and caused him more fatigue of limb and of mind than it is
easy to express. He went to Tottenham's--where, indeed, he showed
himself every day, getting more and more irritated with the
Entertainment, and all its preparations--as soon as he had ascertained
beyond doubt that the marriage at Hart Street Chapel was fictitious.
Miss Lockwood, he was informed, was an invalid, but would see him in the
young ladies' dining-room, where, accordingly, he found her, looking
sharper, and whiter, and more worn than ever. He told her his news
quietly, with a natural pity for the woman deceived; a gleam of sudden
light shone in her eyes.
"I told you so," she said, triumphantly; "now didn't I tell you so? He
wanted to take me in--I felt it from the very first; but he hadn't got
to do with a fool, as he thought. I was even with him for that."
"I have written to find out if your Scotch witnesses are alive," said
Edgar.
"Alive!--why shouldn't they be alive, like I am, and like he is?" she
cried, with feverish irritability. "Folks of our ages don't die!--what
are you thinking of? And if they were dead, what would it
matter?--there's their names as good as themselves. Ah! I didn't botch
my business any more than he botched his. You'll find it's all right."
"I hope you are better," Edgar said, with a compassion that was all the
more profound because the object of it neither deserved, nor would have
accepted it.
"Better--oh! thank you, I am quite well," she said lightly--"only a bit
of a cold. Perhaps on the whole it's as well I'm not going to sing
to-night; a cold is so bad for one's voice. Good-bye, Mr. Earnshaw.
We'll meet at the old gentleman's turnout to-night."
And she waved her hand, dismissing poor Edgar, who left her with a
warmer sense of disgust, and dislike than had ever moved his friendly
bosom before. And yet it was in this creature's interests he was
working, and against Clare! Mr. Tottenham caught him on his way out, to
hand him a number of letters which had arrived for him, and to call for
his advice in the final preparations. The public had been shut out of
the hall in which the Entertainment was to be, on pretence of
alterations.
"Three more resignations," Mr. Tottenham said, who was feverish and
harassed, and looked like a man at the end of his patience. "Heaven be
praised, it will be over to-night? Come early, Earnshaw, if you can
spare the time, and stand by me. If any of the performers get cross, and
refuse to perform, what shall I do?"
"Let them!" cried Edgar; "ungrateful fools, after all your kindness."
Edgar was too much harassed and annoyed himself to be perfectly rational
in his judgments.
"Don't let us be uncharitable," said Mr. Tottenham; "have they perhaps,
after all, much reason for gratitude? Is it not my own crotchet I am
carrying out, in spite of all obstacles? But it will be a lesson--I
think it will be a lesson," he added. "And, Earnshaw, don't fail me
to-night."
Edgar went straight from the shop to Mr. Parchemin's, to receive the
opinion of the eminent Scotch law authority in respect to the marriage
certificate. He had written to Robert Campbell, at Loch Arroch Head,
suggesting that inquiries might be made about the persons who signed it,
and had heard from him that morning that the landlady of the inn was
certainly to be found, and that she perfectly remembered having put her
name to the paper. The waiter was no longer there, but could be easily
laid hands upon. There was accordingly no hope except in the Scotch
lawyer, who might still make waste paper of the certificate. Edgar found
Mr. Parchemin hot and red, after a controversy with this functionary.
"He laughs at my indignation," said the old lawyer. "Well, I suppose if
one did not heat one's self in argument, what he says might have some
justice in it. He says innocent men that let women alone, and innocent
women that behave as they ought to do, will never get any harm from the
Scotch marriage law; and that it's always a safeguard for a poor girl
that may have been led astray without meaning it. He says--well, I see
you're impatient--though how such an anomaly can ever be suffered so
near to civilization! Well, he says it's as good a marriage as if it had
been done in Westminster Abbey by the Archbishop of Canterbury. That's
all the comfort I've got to give you. I hope it hasn't got anything
directly to say to you."
"Thanks," said Edgar, faintly; "it has to do with some--very dear
friends of mine. I could scarcely feel it more deeply if it concerned
myself."
"It is a disgrace to civilization!" cried the lawyer--"it is a
subversion of every honest principle. You young men ought to take
warning--"
"--To do a villainy of this kind, when we mean to do it, out of
Scotland?" said Edgar, "or we may find ourselves the victims instead of
the victors? Heaven forbid that I should do anything to save a
scoundrel from his just deserts!"
"But I thought you were interested--deeply interested----"
"Not for him, the cowardly blackguard!" cried Edgar, excited beyond
self-control.
He turned away from the place, holding the lawyer's opinion, for which
he had spent a large part of his little remaining stock of money,
clutched in his hand. A feverish, momentary sense, almost of
gratification, that Arden should have been thus punished, possessed
him--only for a moment. He hastened to the club, where he could sit
quiet and think it over. He had not been able even to consider his own
business, but had thrust his letters into his pocket without looking at
them.
When he found himself alone, or almost alone, in a corner of the
library, he covered his face with his hands, and yielded to the crushing
influence of this last certainty. Clare was no longer an honoured
matron, the possessor of a well-recognized position, the mother of
children of whom she was proud, the wife of a man whom at least she had
once loved, and who, presumably, had done nothing to make her hate and
scorn him. God help her! What was she now? What was her position to be?
She had no relations to fall back upon, or to stand by her in her
trouble, except himself, who was no relation--only poor Edgar, her
loving brother, bound to her by everything but blood; but, alas! he knew
that in such emergencies blood is everything, and other ties count for
so little. The thought made his heart sick; and he could not be silent,
could not hide it from her, dared not shut up this secret in his own
mind, as he might have done almost anything else that affected her
painfully. There was but one way, but one step before him now.
His letters tumbled out of his pocket as he drew out Miss Lockwood's
original paper, and he tried to look at them, by way of giving his
overworn mind a pause, and that he might be the better able to choose
the best way of carrying out the duty now before him. These letters
were--some of them, at least--answers to those which he had written in
the excitement and happy tumult of his mind, after Lady Mary's
unintentional revelation. He read them as through a mist; their very
meaning came dimly upon him, and he could with difficulty realize the
state of his feelings when, all glowing with the prospect of personal
happiness, and the profound and tender exultation with which he found
himself to be still beloved, he had written these confident appeals to
the kindness of his friends. Most likely, had he read the replies with a
disengaged mind, they would have disappointed him bitterly, with a
dreariness of downfall proportioned to his warmth of hope. But in his
present state of mind every sound around him was muffled, every blow
softened. One nail strikes out another, say the astute Italians. The
mind is not capable of two profound and passionate preoccupations at
once. He read them with subdued consciousness, with a veil before his
eyes. They were all friendly, and some were warmly cordial. "What can we
do for you?" they all said. "If you could take a mastership, I have
interest at more than one public school; but, alas! I suppose you did
not even take your degree in England," one wrote to him. "If you knew
anything about land, or had been trained to the law," said another, "I
might have got you a land agency in Ireland, a capital thing for a man
of energy and courage; but then I fear you are no lawyer, and not much
of an agriculturist." "What can you do, my dear fellow?" said a third,
more cautiously. "Think what you are most fit for--you must know best
yourself--and let me know, and I will try all I can do."
Edgar laughed as he bundled them all back into his pocket. What was he
most fit for? To be an amateur detective, and find out secrets that
broke his heart. A dull ache for his own disappointment (though his mind
was not lively enough to feel disappointed) seemed to add to the general
despondency, the lowered life and oppressed heart of which he had been
conscious without this. But then what had he to do with personal comfort
or happiness? In the first place there lay this tremendous passage
before him--this revelation to be made to Clare.
It was late in the afternoon before he could nerve himself to write the
indispensable letter, from which he felt it was cowardly to shrink. It
was not a model of composition, though it gave him a great deal of
trouble. This is what he said:--
"SIR,
"It is deeply against my will that I address you, so long after
all communication has ended between us; and it is possible that you
may not remember even the new name with which I sign this. By a
singular and unhappy chance, facts in your past life, affecting the
honour and credit of the family, have been brought to my knowledge,
of all people in the world. If I could have avoided the confidence,
I should have done so; but it was out of my power. When I say that
these facts concern a person called Lockwood (or so called, at
least, before her pretended marriage), you will, I have no doubt,
understand what I mean. Will you meet me, at any place you may
choose to appoint, for the purpose of discussing this most
momentous and fatal business? I have examined it minutely, with the
help of the best legal authority, from whom the real names of the
parties have been concealed, and I cannot hold out to you any hope
that it will be easily arranged. In order, however, to save it from
being thrown at once into professional hands, and exposed to the
public, will you communicate with me, or appoint a time and place
to meet me? I entreat you to do this, for the sake of your children
and family. I cannot trust myself to appeal to any other sacred
claim upon you. For God's sake, let me see you, and tell me if you
have any plea to raise!
"EDGAR EARNSHAW."
He felt that the outburst at the end was injudicious, but could not
restrain the ebullition of feeling. If he could but be allowed to manage
it quietly, to have her misery broken to Clare without any
interposition of the world's scorn or pity. She was the one utterly
guiltless, but it was she who would be most exposed to animadversion; he
felt this, with his heart bleeding for his sister. If he had but had the
privilege of a brother--if he could have gone to her, and drawn her
gently away, and provided home and sympathy for her, before the blow had
fallen! But neither he nor anyone could do this, for Clare was not the
kind of being to make close friends. She reserved her love for the few
who belonged to her, and had little or none to expend on strangers. Did
she still think of him as one belonging to her, or was his recollection
altogether eclipsed, blotted out from her mind? He began half a dozen
letters to Clare herself, asking if she still thought of him, if she
would allow him to remember that he was once her brother, with a
humility which he could not have shown had she been as happy and
prosperous as all the world believed her to be. But after he had written
these letters, one after another, retouching a phrase here, and an
epithet there, which was too weak or too strong for his excited fancy,
and lingering over her name with tears in his eyes, he destroyed them
all. Until he heard from her husband, he did not feel that he could
venture to write to his sister. His sister!--his poor, forlorn, ruined,
solitary sister, rich as she was, and surrounded by all things
advantageous! a wife, and yet no wife; the mother of children whose
birth would be their shame! Edgar rose up from where he was writing in
the intolerable pang of this thought--he could not keep still while it
flashed through his mind. Clara, the proudest, the purest, the most
fastidious of women--how could she bear it? He said to himself that it
was impossible--impossible--that she must die of it! There was no way of
escape for her. It would kill her, and his was the hand which had to
give the blow.
In this condition, with such thoughts running over in his vexed brain,
to go back to the shop, and find poor Mr. Tottenham wrestling among the
difficulties which, poor man, were overwhelming him, with dark lines of
care under his eyes, and his face haggard with anxiety--imagine, dear
reader, what it was! He could have laughed at the petty trouble; yet no
one could laugh at the pained face, the kind heart wounded, the manifest
and quite overwhelming trouble of the philanthropist.
"I don't even know yet whether they will keep to their engagements; and
we are all at sixes and sevens, and the company will begin to arrive in
an hour or two!" cried poor Mr. Tottenham. Edgar's anxieties were so
much more engrossing and terrible that to have a share in these small
ones did him good; and he was so indifferent that he calmed everybody,
brought the unruly performers back to their senses, and thrust all the
arrangements on by the sheer carelessness he felt as to whether they
were ready or not. "Who cares about your play?" he said to Watson, who
came to pour out his grievances. "Do you think the Duchess of
Middlemarch is so anxious to hear you? They will enjoy themselves a
great deal better chatting to each other."
This brought Mr. Watson and his troupe to their senses, as all Mr.
Tottenham's agitated remonstrances had not brought them. Edgar did not
care to be in the way of the fine people when they arrived. He got a
kind word from Lady Mary, who whispered to him, "How ill you are
looking! You must tell us what it is, and let us help you;" for this
kind woman found it hard to realise that there were things in which the
support of herself and her husband would be but little efficacious; and
he had approached Lady Augusta, as has been recorded, with some wistful,
hopeless intention of recommending Clare to her, in case of anything
that might happen. But Lady Augusta had grown so pale at the sight of
him, and had thrown so many uneasy glances round her, that Edgar
withdrew, with his heart somewhat heavy, feeling his burden rather more
than he could conveniently bear. He had gone and hid himself in the
library, trying to read, and hearing far off the din of applause--the
distant sound of voices. The noise of the visitors' feet approaching had
driven him from that refuge, when Mr. Tottenham, in high triumph, led
his guests through his huge establishment. Edgar, dislodged, and not
caring to put himself in the way of further discouragement, chose this
moment to give his message to Phil, and strayed away from sound and
light into the retired passages, when that happened to him in his time
of extremity which it is now my business to record.
CHAPTER XII.
A New Event.
"Have you--forgotten me--then?"
"Forgotten you!" cried Edgar.
Heaven help him!--he did not advance nor take her hands, which she held
out, kept back by his honour and promise--till he saw that her eyes were
full of tears, that her lips were quivering, unable to articulate
anything more, and that her figure swayed slightly, as if tottering.
Then all that was superficial went to the winds. He took her back
through the half-lighted passage, supporting her tenderly, to Mr.
Tottenham's room. The door closed behind them, and Gussy turned to him
with swimming eyes--eyes running over with tears and wistful happiness.
She could not speak. She let him hold her, and looked up at him, all her
heart in her face. Poor Edgar was seized upon at the same moment, all
unprepared as he was, by that sudden gush of long-restrained feeling
which carries all before it. "Is this how it is to be?" he said, no
louder than a whisper, holding her fast and close, grasping her slender
arm, as if she might still flee from him, or revolt from his touch. But
Gussy had no mind to escape. Either she had nothing to say, or she was
still too much shaken to attempt to say it. She let her head drop like a
flower overcharged, and leaned on him and fell a-sobbing--fell on his
neck, as the Bible says, though Gussy's little figure fell short of
that, and she only leaned as high as she could reach, resting there like
a child. If ever a man came at a step out of purgatory, or worse, into
Paradise, it was this man. Utterly alone half an hour ago, now companied
so as all the world could not add to him. He did not try to stop her
sobbing, but bent his head down upon hers, and I think for one moment
let his own heart expand into something which was like a sob too--an
inarticulate utterance of all this sudden rapture, unexpected, unlooked
for, impossible as it was.
I do not know which was the first to come to themselves. It must have
been Gussy, whose sobs had relieved her soul. She stirred within his
arm, and lifted her head, and tried to withdraw from him.
"Not yet, not yet," said Edgar. "Think how long I have wanted you, how
long I have yearned for you; and that I have no right to you even now."
"Right!" said Gussy, softly--"you have the only right--no one can have
any right but you."
"Is it so?--is it so? Say it again," said Edgar. "Say that I am not a
selfish hound, beguiling you; but that you will have it so. Say you will
have it so! What I will is not the question--it is your will that is my
law."
"Do you know what you are saying--or have you turned a little foolish?"
said the Gussy of old, with a laugh which was full of the tears with
which her eyes were still shining and bright; and then she paused, and
looking up at him, blushing, hazarded an inquiry--"Are you in love with
me now?" she said.
"Now; and for how long?--three years--every day and all day long!" cried
Edgar. "It could not do you any harm so far off. But I should not have
dared to think of you so much if I had ever hoped for this."
"Do not hold me so tight now," said Gussy. "I shall not run away. Do you
remember the last time--ah! we were not in love with each other then."
"But loved each other--the difference is not very great," he said,
looking at her wistfully, making his eyes once more familiar with her
face.
"Ah! there is a great difference," said Gussy. "We were only, as you
said, fond of each other; I began to feel it when you were gone. Tell me
all that has happened since," she said, suddenly--"everything! You said
you had been coming to ask me that dreadful morning. We have belonged to
each other ever since; and so much has happened to you. Tell me
everything; I have a right to know."
"Nothing has happened to me but the best of all things," said Edgar,
"and the worst. I have broken my word; I promised to your mother never
to put myself in the way; I have disgraced myself, and I don't care. And
this has happened to me," he said low in her ear, "my darling! Gussy,
you are sure you know what you are doing? I am poor, ruined, with no
prospects for the moment----"
"Don't, please," said Gussy, throwing back her head with the old pretty
movement. "I suppose you don't mean to be idle and lazy, and think me a
burden; and I can make myself very useful, in a great many ways. Why
should I have to think what I am doing more than I ought to have done
three years ago, when you came to Thornleigh that morning? I had done my
thinking then."
"And, please God, you shall not repent of it!" cried the happy young
man--"you shall not repent it, if I can help it. But your mother will
not think so, darling; she will upbraid me with keeping you back--from
better things."
"That will be to insult me!" cried Gussy, flaming with hot, beautiful
anger and shame. "Edgar, do you think I should have walked into your
arms like this, not waiting to be asked, if I had not thought all this
time that we have been as good as married these three years? Oh! what am
I saying?" cried poor Gussy, overwhelmed with sudden confusion. It had
seemed so natural, so matter-of-fact a statement to her--until she had
said the words, and read a new significance in the glow of delight which
flashed up in his eyes.
Is it necessary to follow this couple further into the foolishness of
their mutual talk?--it reads badly on paper, and in cold blood. They had
forgotten what the hour was, and most other things, when Mr. Tottenham,
very weary, but satisfied, came suddenly into the room, with his head
full of the Entertainment. His eyes were more worn than ever, but the
lines of care under them had melted away, and a fatigued, half-imbecile
smile of pleasure was hanging about his face. He was too much worn out
to judge anyone--to be hard upon anyone that night. Fatigue and relief
of mind had affected him like a genial, gentle intoxication of the
spirit. He stopped short, startled, and perhaps shocked for the moment,
when Edgar, and that white little figure beside him, rose hastily from
the chairs, which had been so very near each other. I am afraid that,
for the first moment, Mr. Tottenham felt a chill of dread that it was
one of his own young ladies from the establishment. He did not speak,
and they did not speak for some moments. Then, with an attempt at
severity, Mr. Tottenham said,
"Gussy, is it possible? How should you have come here?"
"Oh! uncle, forgive us!" said Gussy, taking Edgar's arm, and clinging to
it, "and speak to mamma for us. I accepted him three years ago, Uncle
Tom. He is the same man--or, rather, a far nicer man," and here she gave
a closer clasp to his arm, and dropped her voice for the moment, "only
poor. Only poor!--does that make all the difference? Can you tell me any
reason, Uncle Tottenham, why I should give him up, now he has come
back?"
"My dear," said Mr. Tottenham, alarmed yet conciliatory, "your
mother--no, I don't pretend I see it--your mother, Gussy, must be the
best judge. Earnshaw, my dear fellow, was it not understood between us?
I don't blame you. I don't say I wouldn't have done the same; but was it
not agreed between us? You should have given me fair warning, and she
should never have come here."
"I gave Lady Mary fair warning," said Edgar, who felt himself ready at
this moment to confront the whole world. "I promised to deny myself; but
no power in the world should make me deny Gussy anything she pleased;
and this is what she pleases, it appears," he said, looking down upon
her with glowing eyes. "A poor thing, sir, but her own--and she chooses
it. I can give up my own will, but Gussy shall have her will, if I can
get it for her. I gave Lady Mary fair warning; and then we met
unawares."
"And it was all my doing, please, uncle," said Gussy, with a little
curtsey. She was trembling with happiness, with agitation, with the
mingled excitement and calm of great emotion; but still she could not
shut out from herself the humour of the situation--"it was all my doing,
please."
"Ah! I see how it is," said Mr. Tottenham. "You have been carried off,
Earnshaw, and made a prey of against your will. Don't ask me for my
opinion, yes or no. Take what good you can of to-night, you will have a
pleasant waking up, I promise you, to-morrow morning. The question is,
in the meantime, how are you to get home? Every soul is gone, and my
little brougham is waiting, with places for two only, at the door. Send
that fellow away, and I'll take you home to your mother."
But poor Gussy had very little heart to send her recovered lover away.
She clung to his arm, with a face like an April day, between smiles and
tears.
"He says quite true. We shall have a dreadful morning," she said,
disconsolately. "When can you come, Edgar? I will say nothing till you
come."
As Gussy spoke there came suddenly back upon Edgar a reflection of all
he had to do. Life had indeed come back to him all at once, her hands
full of thorns and roses piled together. He fixed the time of his visit
to Lady Augusta next morning, as he put Gussy into Mr. Tottenham's
brougham, and setting off himself at a great pace, arrived at Berkeley
Square as soon as they did, and attended her to the well-known door.
Gussy turned round on the threshold of the house where he had been once
so joyfully received, but where his appearance now, he knew, would be
regarded with horror and consternation, and waved her hand to him as he
went away. But having done so, I am afraid her courage failed, and she
stole away rapidly upstairs, and took refuge in her own room, and even
put herself within the citadel of her bed.
"I came home with Uncle Tottenham in his brougham," she said to Ada,
who, half-alarmed, paid her a furtive visit, "and I am so tired and
sleepy!"
Poor Gussy, she was safe for that night, but when morning came what was
to become of her? So far from being sleepy, I do not believe that,
between the excitement, the joy, and the terror, she closed her eyes
that whole night.
Mr. Tottenham, too, got out of the brougham at Lady Augusta's door; his
own house was on the other side of the Square. He sent the carriage
away, and took Edgar's arm, and marched him solemnly along the damp
pavement.
"Earnshaw, my dear fellow," he said, in the deepest of sepulchral tones,
"I am afraid you have been very imprudent. You will have a mauvais
quart d'heure to-morrow."
"I know it," said Edgar, himself feeling somewhat alarmed, in the midst
of his happiness.
"I am afraid--you ought not to have let her carry you off your feet in
this way; you ought to have been wise for her and yourself too; you
ought to have avoided any explanation. Mind, I don't say that my
feelings go with that sort of thing; but in common prudence--in justice
to her----"
"Justice to her!" cried Edgar. "If she has been faithful for three
years, do you think she is likely to change now? All that time not a
word has passed between us; but you told me yourself she would not hear
of--anything; that she spoke of retiring from the world. Would that be
wiser or more prudent? Look here, nobody in the world has been so kind
to me as you. I want you to understand me. A man may sacrifice his own
happiness, but has he any right to sacrifice the woman he loves? It
sounds vain, does it not?--but if she chooses to think this her
happiness, am I to contradict her? I will do all that becomes a man,"
cried Edgar, unconsciously adopting, in his excitement, the well-known
words, "but do you mean to say it is a man's duty to crush, and balk,
and stand out against the woman he loves?"
"You are getting excited," said Mr. Tottenham. "Speak lower, for
heaven's sake! Earnshaw; don't let poor Mary hear of it to-night."
There was something in the tone in which he said poor Mary, with a
profound comic pathos, as if his wife would be the chief sufferer, which
almost overcame Edgar's gravity. Poor Mr. Tottenham was weak with his
own sufferings, and with the blessed sense that he had got over them for
the moment.
"What a help you were to me this afternoon," he said, "though I daresay
your mind was full of other things. Nothing would have settled into
place, and we should have had a failure instead of a great success but
for you. You think it was a great success? Everybody said so. And your
poor lady, Earnshaw--your--friend--what of her? Is it as bad as you
feared?"
"It is as bad as it is possible to be," said Edgar, suddenly sobered. "I
must ask further indulgence from you, I fear, to see a very bad business
to an end."
"You mean, a few days' freedom? Yes, certainly; perhaps it might be as
well in every way. And money--are you sure you have money? Perhaps it is
just as well you did not come to the Square, though they were ready for
you. Do you come with me to-night?"
"I am at my old rooms," said Edgar. "Now that the Entertainment is over,
I shall not return till my business is done--or not then, if you think
it best."
"Nothing of the sort!" cried his friend--"only till it is broken to poor
Mary," he added, once more lachrymose. "But, Earnshaw, poor fellow, I
feel for you. You'll let me know what Augusta says?"
And Mr. Tottenham opened his door with his latch-key, and crept upstairs
like a criminal. He was terrified for his wife, to whom he felt this bad
news must be broken with all the precaution possible; and though he
could not prevent his own thoughts from straying into a weak-minded
sympathy with the lovers, he did not feel at all sure that she would
share his sentiments.
"Mary, at heart, is a dreadful little aristocrat," he said to himself,
as he lingered in his dressing-room to avoid her questions; not knowing
that Lady Mary's was the rash hand which had set this train of
inflammables first alight.
Next morning--ah! next morning, there was the rub!--Edgar would have to
face Lady Augusta, and Gussy her mother, and Mr. Tottenham, who felt
himself by this time an accomplice, his justly indignant wife; besides
that the latter unfortunate gentleman had also to go to the shop, and
face the resignations offered to himself, and deadly feuds raised
amongst his "assistants," by the preliminaries of last night. In the
meantime, all the culprits tried hard not to think of the terrible
moment that awaited them, and I think the lovers succeeded. Lovers have
the best of it in such emergencies; the enchanted ground of recollection
and imagination to which they can return being more utterly severed from
the common world than any other refuge.
The members of the party who remained longest up were Lady Augusta and
Ada, who sat over the fire in the mother's bed-room, and discussed
everything with a generally satisfied and cheerful tone in their
communings.
"Gussy came home with Uncle Tottenham in his brougham," said Ada. "She
has gone to bed. She was out in her district a long time this morning,
and I think she is very tired to-night."
"Oh, her district!" cried Lady Augusta. "I like girls to think of the
poor, my dear--you know I do--I never oppose anything in reason; but why
Gussy should work like a slave, spoiling her hands and complexion, and
exposing herself in all weathers for the sake of her district! And it is
not as if she had no opportunities. I wish you would speak to her,
Ada. She ought to marry, if it were only for the sake of the boys; and
why she is so obstinate, I cannot conceive."
"Mamma, don't say so--you know well enough why," said Ada quietly. "I
don't say you should give in to her; but at least you know."
"Well, I must say I think my daughters have been hard upon me," said
Lady Augusta, with a sigh--"even you, my darling--though I can't find it
in my heart to blame you. But, to change the subject, did you notice,
Ada, how well Harry was looking? Dear fellow! he has got over his little
troubles with your father. Tottenham's has done him good; he always got
on well with Mary and your odd, good uncle. Harry is so good-hearted and
so simple-minded, he can get on with anybody; and I quite feel that I
had a good inspiration," said Lady Augusta, with a significant nod of
her head, "when I sent him there. I am sure it has been for everybody's
good."
"In what way, mamma?" said Ada, who was not at all so confident in
Harry's powers.
"Well, dear, he has been on the spot," said Lady Augusta; "he has
exercised an excellent influence. When poor Edgar, poor dear fellow,
came up to me to-night, I could not think what to do for the best, for I
expected Gussy to appear any moment; and even Mary and Beatrice, had
they seen him, would have made an unnecessary fuss. But he took the hint
at my first glance. I can only believe it was dear Harry's doing,
showing him the utter hopelessness--Poor fellow!" said Lady Augusta,
putting her handkerchief to her eyes. "Oh! my dear, how inscrutable are
the ways of Providence! Had things been ordered otherwise, what a
comfort he might have been to us--what a help!"
"When you like him so well yourself, mamma," said gentle Ada, "you
should understand poor Gussy's feelings, who was always encouraged to
think of him--till the change came."
"That is just what I say, dear," said Lady Augusta; "if things had been
ordered otherwise! We can't change the arrangements of Providence,
however much we may regret them. But at least it is a great comfort
about dear Harry. How well he was looking!--and how kind and
affectionate! I almost felt as if he were a boy again, just come from
school, and so glad to see his people. It was by far the greatest
pleasure I had to-night."
And so this unsuspecting woman went to bed. She had a good night, for
she was not afraid of the morrow, dismal as were the tidings it was
fated to bring to her maternal ear.
CHAPTER XIII.
Berkeley Square.
At eleven o'clock next morning, Edgar, with a beating heart, knocked at
the door in Berkeley Square. The footman, who was an old servant, and
doubtless remembered all about him, let him in with a certain
hesitation--so evident that Edgar reassured him by saying, "I am
expected," which was all he could manage to get out with his dry lips.
Heaven send him better utterance when he gets to the moment of his
trial! I leave the reader to imagine the effect produced when the door
of the morning room, in which Lady Augusta was seated with her
daughters, was suddenly opened, and Edgar, looking very pale, and
terribly serious, walked into the room.
They were all there. The table was covered with patterns for Mary's
trousseau, and she herself was examining a heap of shawls, with Ada, at
the window. Gussy, expectant, and changing colour so often that her
agitation had already been remarked upon several times this morning, had
kept close to her mother. Beatrice was practising a piece of music at
the little piano in the corner, which was the girls' favourite refuge
for their musical studies. They all stopped in their various
occupations, and turned round when he came in. Lady Augusta sprang to
her feet, and put out one hand in awe and horror, to hold him at arm's
length. Her first look was for him, her second for Gussy, to whom she
said, "Go--instantly!" as distinctly as eyes could speak; but, for once
in her life, Gussy would not understand her mother's eyes. And, what was
worst of all, the two young ones, Mary and Beatrice, when they caught
sight of Edgar, uttered each a cry of delight, and rushed upon him with
eager hands outstretched.
"Oh! you have come home for It!--say you have come home for It!" cried
Mary, to whom her approaching wedding was the one event which shadowed
earth and heaven.
"Girls!" cried Lady Augusta, severely, "do not lay hold upon Mr.
Earnshaw in that rude way. Go upstairs, all of you. Mr. Earnshaw's
business, no doubt, is with me."
"Oh! mamma, mayn't I talk to him for a moment?" cried Mary, aggrieved,
and unwilling, in the fulness of her privileges, to acknowledge herself
still under subjection.
But Lady Augusta's eyes spoke very decisively this time, and Ada set the
example by hastening away. Even Ada, however, could not resist the
impulse of putting her hand in Edgar's as she passed him. She divined
everything in a moment. She said "God bless you!" softly, so that no one
could hear it but himself. Only Gussy did not move.
"I must stay, mamma," she said, in tones so vehement that even Lady
Augusta was awed by them. "I will never disobey you again, but I must
stay!"
And then Edgar was left alone, facing the offended lady. Gussy had
stolen behind her, whence she could throw a glance of sympathy to her
betrothed, undisturbed by her mother. Lady Augusta did not ask him to
sit down. She seated herself in a stately manner, like a queen receiving
a rebel.
"Mr. Earnshaw," she said, solemnly, "after all that has passed between
us, and all you have promised--I must believe that there is some very
grave reason for your unexpected visit to-day."
What a different reception it was from that she had given him,
when--coming, as she supposed, on the same errand which really brought
him now--he had to tell her of his loss of everything! Then the whole
house had been pleasantly excited over the impending proposal; and Gussy
had been kissed and petted by all her sisters, as the heroine of the
drama; and Lady Augusta's motherly heart had swelled with gratitude to
God that she had secured for her daughter not only a good match, but a
good man. It was difficult for Edgar, at least, to shut out all
recollection of the one scene in the other. He answered with less
humility than he had shown before, and with a dignity which impressed
her, in spite of herself,
"Yes, there is a very grave reason for it," he said--"the gravest
reason--without which I should not have intruded upon you. I made you a
voluntary promise some time since, seeing your dismay at my
re-appearance, that I would not interfere with any of your plans, or put
myself in your way."
"Yes," said Lady Augusta, in all the horror of suspense. Gussy, behind,
whispered, "You have not!--you have not!" till her mother turned and
looked at her, when she sank upon the nearest seat, and covered her face
with her hands.
"I might say that I have not, according to the mere letter of my word,"
said Edgar; "but I will not stand by that. Lady Augusta, I have come to
tell you that I have broken my promise. I find I had no right to make
it. I answered for myself, but not for another dearer than myself. The
pledge was given in ignorance, and foolishly. I have broken it, and I
have come to ask you to forgive me."
"You have broken your word? Mr. Earnshaw, I was not aware that gentlemen
ever did so. I do not believe you are capable of doing so," she cried,
in great agitation. "Gussy, go upstairs, you have nothing to do with
this discussion--you were not a party to the bargain. I cannot--cannot
allow myself to be treated in this way! Mr. Earnshaw, think what you are
saying! You cannot go back from your word!"
"Forgive me," he said, "I have done it. Had I known all, I would not
have given the promise; I told Lady Mary Tottenham so; my pledge was for
myself, to restrain my own feelings. From the moment that it was
betrayed to me that she too had feelings to restrain, my very principle
of action, my rule of honour, was changed. It was no longer my duty to
deny myself to obey you. My first duty was to her, Lady Augusta--if in
that I disappoint you, if I grieve you----"
"You do more than disappoint me--you horrify me!" cried Lady Augusta.
"You make me think that nothing is to be relied upon--no man's word to
be trusted, No, no, we must have no more of this," she said, with
vehemence. "Forget what you have said, Mr. Earnshaw, and I will try to
forget it. Go to your room, Gussy--this is no scene for you."
Edgar stood before his judge motionless, saying no more. I think he felt
now how completely the tables were turned, and what an almost cruel
advantage he had over her. His part was that of fact and reality, which
no one could conjure back into nothingness; and hers that of opposition,
disapproval, resistance to the inevitable. He was the rock, and she the
vexed and vexing waves, dashing against it, unable to overthrow it. In
their last great encounter these positions had been reversed, and it was
she who had command of the situation. Now, howsoever parental authority
might resist, or the world oppose, the two lovers knew very well, being
persons in their full senses, and of full age, that they had but to
persevere, and their point would be gained.
Lady Augusta felt it too--it was this which had made her so deeply
alarmed from the first, so anxious to keep Edgar at arm's length. The
moment she caught sight of him on this particular morning, she felt that
all was over. But that certainty unfortunately does not quench the
feelings of opposition, though it may take all hope of eventual success
from them. All that this secret conviction of the uselessness of
resistance did for Lady Augusta was to make her more hot, more
desperate, more acharne than she had ever been. She grew angry at the
silence of her opponent--his very patience seemed a renewed wrong, a
contemptuous evidence of conscious power.
"You do not say anything," she cried. "You allow me to speak without an
answer. What do you mean me to understand by this--that you defy me? I
have treated you as a friend all along. I thought you were good, and
honourable, and true. I have always stood up for you--treated you almost
like a son! And is this to be the end of it? You defy me! You teach my
own child to resist my will! You do not even keep up the farce of
respecting my opinion--now that she has gone over to your side!"
Here poor Lady Augusta got up from her chair, flushed and trembling,
with the tears coming to her eyes, and an angry despair warring against
very different feelings in her mind. She rose up, not looking at either
of the culprits, and leant her arm on the mantelpiece, and gazed
unawares at her own excited, troubled countenance in the glass. Yes,
they had left her out of their calculations; she who had always (she
knew) been so good to them! It no longer seemed worth while to send
Gussy away, to treat her as if she were innocent of the complot. She had
gone over to the other side. Lady Augusta felt herself deserted,
slighted, injured, with the two against her--and determined, doubly
determined, never to yield.
"Mamma," said Gussy, softly, "do not be angry with Edgar. Don't you
know, as well as I, that I have always been on his side?"
"Don't venture to say a word to me, Gussy," said Lady Augusta. "I will
not endure it from you!"
"Mamma, I must speak. It was you who turned my thoughts to him first.
Was it likely that I should forget him because he was in trouble? Why,
you did not! You yourself were fond of him all along, and trusted him
so that you took his pledge to give up his own will to yours. But I
never gave any pledge," said Gussy, folding her hands. "You never asked
me what I thought, or I should have told you. I have been waiting for
Edgar. He has not dared to come to me since he came back to England,
because of his promise to you; and I have not dared to go to him,
because--simply because I was a woman. But when we met, mamma--when we
met, I say--not his seeking or my seeking--by accident, as you call
it----"
"Oh! accident!" cried Lady Augusta, with a sneer, which sat very
strangely upon her kind face. "Accident! One knows how such accidents
come to pass!"
"If you doubt our truth," cried Gussy, in a little outburst, "of course
there is no more to say."
"I beg your pardon," said the mother, faintly. She had put herself in
the wrong. The sneer, the first and only sneer of which poor Lady
Augusta had known herself to be guilty, turned to a weapon against her.
Compunction and shame filled up the last drop of the conflicting
emotions that possessed her. "It is easy for you both to speak," she
said, "very easy; to you it is nothing but a matter of feeling. You
never ask yourself how it is to be done. You never think of the thousand
difficulties with the world, with your father, with circumstances. What
have I taken the trouble to struggle for? You yourself do me justice,
Gussy! Not because I would not have preferred Edgar--oh! don't come near
me!" she cried, holding out her hand to keep him back; as he approached
a step at the softening sound of his name--"don't work upon my feelings!
It is cruel; it is taking a mean advantage. Not because I did not prefer
him--but because life is not a dream, as you think it, not a romance,
nor a poem. What am I to do?" cried Lady Augusta, clasping her hands,
and raising them with unconscious, most natural theatricalness. "What am
I to do? How am I to face your father, your brothers, the world?"
I do not know what the two listeners could have done, after the climax
of this speech, but to put themselves at her feet, with that instinct of
nature in extreme circumstances which the theatre has seized for its
own, and given a partially absurd colour to; but they were saved from
thus committing themselves by the sudden and precipitate entrance of
Lady Mary, who flung the door open, and suddenly rushed among them
without warning or preparation.
"I come to warn you," she cried, "Augusta!" Then stopped short, seeing
at a glance the state of affairs.
They all stood gazing at each other for a moment, the others not
divining what this interruption might mean, and feeling instinctively
driven back upon conventional self-restraint and propriety, by the
entrance of the new-comer. Lady Augusta unclasped her hands, and stole
back guiltily to her chair. Edgar recovered his wits, and placed one for
Lady Mary. Gussy dropped upon the sofa behind her mother, and cast a
secret glance of triumph at him from eyes still wet with tears. He alone
remained standing, a culprit still on his trial, who felt the number of
his judges increased, without knowing whether his cause would take a
favourable or unfavourable aspect in the eyes of the new occupant of the
judicial bench.
"What have you all been doing?" said Lady Mary--"you look as much
confused and scared by my appearance as if I had disturbed you in the
midst of some wrong-doing or other. Am I to divine what has happened? It
is what I was coming to warn you against; I was going to say that I
could no longer answer for Mr. Earnshaw--"
"I have spoken for myself," said Edgar. "Lady Augusta knows that all my
ideas and my duties have changed. I do not think I need stay longer. I
should prefer to write to Mr. Thornleigh at once, unless Lady Augusta
objects; but I can take no final negative now from anyone but Gussy
herself."
"And that he shall never have!" cried Gussy, with a ring of premature
triumph in her voice. Her mother turned round upon her again with a
glance of fire.
"Is that the tone you have learned among the Sisters?" said Lady
Augusta, severely. "Yes, go, Mr. Earnshaw, go--we have had enough of
this."
Edgar was perhaps as much shaken as any of them by all he had gone
through. He went up to Lady Augusta, and took her half-unwilling hand
and kissed it.
"Do you remember," he said, "dear Lady Augusta, when you cried over me
in my ruin, and kissed me like my mother? I cannot forget it, if I
should live a hundred years. You have never abandoned me, though you
feared me. Say one kind word to me before I go."
Lady Augusta tried hard not to look at the supplicant. She turned her
head away, she gulped down a something in her throat which almost
overcame her. The tears rushed to her eyes.
"Don't speak to me!" she cried--"don't speak to me! Shall I not be a
sufferer too? God bless you, Edgar! I have always felt like your mother.
Go away!--go away!--don't speak to me any more!"
Edgar had the sense to obey her without another look or word. He did not
even pause to glance at Gussy (at which she was much aggrieved), but
left the room at once. And then Gussy crept to her mother's side, and
knelt down there, clinging with her arms about the vanquished
Rhadamantha; and the three women kissed each other, and cried together,
not quite sure whether it was for sorrow or joy.
"You are in love with him yourself, Augusta!" cried Lady Mary, laughing
and crying together before this outburst was over.
"And so I am," said Gussy's mother, drying her kind eyes.
Edgar, as he rushed out, saw heads peeping over the staircase, of which
he took no notice, though one of them was no less than the curled and
shining head of the future Lady Granton, destined Marchioness (one day
or other) of Hauteville. He escaped from these anxious spies, and rushed
through the hall, feeling himself safest out of the house. But on the
threshold he met Harry Thornleigh, who looked at him from head to foot
with an insolent surprise which made Edgar's blood boil.
"You here!" said Harry, with unmistakably disagreeable intention; then
all at once his tone changed--Edgar could not imagine why--and he held
out his hand in greeting. "Missed you at Tottenham's," said Harry; "they
all want you. That little brute Phil is getting unendurable. I wish
you'd whop him when you go back."
"I shall not be back for some days," said Edgar shortly. "I have
business----"
"Here?" asked Harry, with well-simulated surprise. "If you'll let me
give you a little advice, Earnshaw, and won't take it amiss--I can't
help saying you'll get no good here."
"Thank you," said Edgar, feeling a glow of offence mount to his face. "I
suppose every man is the best judge in his own case; but, in the
meantime, I am leaving town--for a day or two."
"Au revoir, then, at Tottenham's," said Harry, with a nod,
half-hostile, half-friendly, and marched into his own house, or what
would one day be his own house, with the air of a master. Edgar left it
with a curious sense of the discouragement meant to be conveyed to him,
which was half-whimsical, half-painful. Harry meant nothing less than to
make him feel that his presence was undesired and inopportune, without,
however, making any breach with him; he had his own reasons for keeping
up a certain degree of friendship with Edgar, but he had no desire that
it should go any further than he thought proper and suitable. As for his
sister's feelings in the matter, Harry ignored and scouted them with
perfect calm and self-possession. If she went and entered a Sisterhood,
as they had all feared at one time, why, she would make a fool of
herself, and there would be an end of it! "I shouldn't interfere," Harry
had said. "It would be silly; but there would be an end of her--no more
responsibility, and that sort of thing. Let her, if she likes, so long
as you're sure she'll stay." But to allow her to make "a low marriage"
was an entirely different matter. Therefore he set Edgar down, according
to his own consciousness, even though he was quite disinclined to
quarrel with Edgar. He was troubled by no meltings of heart, such as
disturbed the repose of his mother. He liked the man well enough, but
what had that to do with it? It was necessary that Gussy should marry
well if she married at all--not so much for herself as for the future
interests of the house of Thornleigh. Harry felt that to have a set of
little beggars calling him "uncle," in the future ages, and sheltering
themselves under the shadow of Thornleigh, was a thing totally out of
the question. The heir indeed might choose for himself, having it in his
power to bestow honour, as in the case of King Cophetua. But probably
even King Cophetua would have deeply disapproved, and indeed interdicted
beggar-maids for his brother, how much more beggar-men for his
sisters--or any connection which could detract from the importance of
the future head of the house.
CHAPTER XIV.
A Suggestion.
Having found his family in considerable agitation, the cause of which
they did not disclose to him, but from which he formed, by his unaided
genius, the agreeable conclusion that Edgar had been definitely sent
off, probably after some presumptuous offer, which Gussy at last was
wise enough to see the folly of--"I see you've sent that fellow off for
good," he said to his sister; "and I'm glad of it."
"Oh! yes, for good," said Gussy, with a flash in her eyes, which he, not
very brilliant in his perceptions, took for indignation at Edgar's
presumption.
"He is a cheeky beggar," said unconscious Harry; "a setting down will do
him good."
But though his heart was full of his own affairs, he thought it best, on
the whole, to defer the confidence with which he meant to honour Lady
Augusta, to a more convenient season. Harry was not particularly bright,
and he felt his own concerns to be so infinitely more important than
anything concerning "the girls," that the two things could not be put in
comparison; but yet the immediate precedent of the sending away of
Gussy's lover was perhaps not quite the best that could be wished for
the favourable hearing of Harry's love. Besides, Lady Augusta was not so
amiable that day as she often was. She was surrounded by a flutter of
girls, putting questions, teasing her for replies, which she seemed very
little disposed to give; and Harry had somewhat fallen in his mother's
opinion, since it had been proved that to have him "on the spot" had
really been quite inefficacious for her purpose. Her confidence in him
had been so unjustifiably great, though Harry was totally ignorant of
it, that her unexpected disapproval was in proportion now.
"It was not Harry's fault," Ada had ventured to say. "How could he guide
events that happened in London when he was at Tottenham's?"
"He ought to have paid more attention," was all that Lady Augusta said.
And unconsciously she turned a cold shoulder to Harry, rather glad, on
the whole, that there was somebody, rightly or wrongly, to blame.
So Harry returned to Tottenham's with his aunt, hurriedly proffering a
visit a few days after. Nobody perceived the suppressed excitement with
which he made this offer, for the house was too full of the stir of one
storm, scarcely blown over, to think of another. He went back,
accordingly, into the country stillness, and spent another lingering
twilight hour with Margaret. How different the atmosphere seemed to be
in which she was! It was another world to Harry; he seemed to himself a
better man. How kind he felt towards the little girl!--he who would have
liked to kick Phil, and thought the Tottenham children so ridiculously
out of place, brought to the front, as they always were. When little
Sibby was "brought to the front," her mother seemed but to gain a grace
the more, and in the cottage Harry was a better man. He took down with
him the loveliest bouquet of flowers that could be got in Covent Garden,
and a few plants in pots, the choicest of their kind, and quite
unlikely, had he known it, to suit the atmosphere of the poky little
cottage parlour.
Mr. Franks had begun to move out of the doctor's house, and very soon
the new family would be able to make their entrance. Margaret and her
brother were going to town to get some furniture, and Harry volunteered
to give them the benefit of his experience, and join their party.
"But we want cheap things," Margaret said, true to her principle of
making no false pretences that could be dispensed with. This did not in
the least affect Harry; he would have stood by and listened to her
cheapening a pot or kettle with a conviction that it was the very best
thing to do. There are other kinds of love, and some which do not so
heartily accept as perfect all that is done by their object; and there
are different stages of love, in not all of which, perhaps, is this
beautiful satisfaction apparent; but at present Harry could see nothing
wrong in the object of his adoration. Whatever she did was right,
graceful, beautiful--the wisest and the best. I do not suppose it is in
the nature of things that this lovely and delightful state of sentiment
could last--but for the moment so it was. And thus, while poor Lady
Augusta passed her days peacefully enough--half happy, half wretched,
now allowing herself to listen to Gussy's anticipations, now asking
bitterly how on earth they expected to exist--this was preparing for
her which was to turn even the glory of Mary's approaching wedding into
misery, and overwhelm the whole house of Thornleigh with dismay. So
blind is human nature, that Lady Augusta had not the slightest
apprehension about Harry. He, at least, was out of harm's way--so long
as the poor boy could find anything to amuse him in the country--she
said to herself, with a sigh of satisfaction and relief.
At the other Tottenham's, things were settling down after the
Entertainment, and happily the result had been so gratifying and
successful that all the feuds and searching of hearts had calmed down.
The supper had been "beautiful," the guests gracious, the enjoyment
almost perfect. Thereafter, to his dying day, Mr. Robinson was able to
quote what Her Grace the Duchess of Middlemarch had said to him on the
subject of his daughter's performance, and the Duchess's joke became a
kind of capital for the establishment, always ready to be drawn upon. No
other establishment had before offered a subject of witty remark (though
Her Grace, good soul, was totally unaware of having been witty) to a
Duchess--no other young ladies and gentlemen attached to a house of
business had ever hobbed and nobbed with the great people in society.
The individuals who had sent in resignations were too glad to be allowed
to forget them, and Mr. Tottenham was in the highest feather, and felt
his scheme to have prospered beyond his highest hopes.
"There is nothing so humanizing as social intercourse," he said. "I
don't say my people are any great things, and we all know that society,
as represented by Her Grace of Middlemarch, is not overwhelmingly witty
or agreeable--eh, Earnshaw? But somehow, in the clash of the two
extremes, something is struck out--a spark that you could not have
otherwise--a really improving influence. I have always thought so; and,
thank heaven, I have lived to carry out my theory."
"At the cost of very hard work, and much annoyance," said Edgar.
"Oh! nothing--nothing, Earnshaw--mere bagatelles. I was tired, and had
lost my temper--very wrong, but I suppose it will happen sometimes; and
not being perfect myself, how am I to expect my people to be perfect?"
said the philanthropist. "Never mind these little matters. The pother
has blown over, and the good remains. By the way, Miss Lockwood is
asking for you, Earnshaw--have you cleared up that business of hers?
She's in a bad way, poor creature! She would expose herself with bare
arms and shoulders, till I sent her an opera-cloak, at a great
sacrifice, from Robinson's department, to cover her up; and she's caught
more cold. Go and see her, there's a good fellow; she's always asking
for you."
Miss Lockwood was in the ladies' sitting-room, where Edgar had seen her
before, wrapped in the warm red opera-cloak which Mr. Tottenham had
sent her, and seated by the fire. Her cheeks were more hollow than ever,
her eyes full of feverish brightness.
"Look here," she said, when Edgar entered, "I don't want you any longer.
You've got it in your head I'm in a consumption, and you are keeping my
papers back, thinking I'm going to die. I ain't going to die--no such
intention--and I'll trouble you either to go on directly and get me my
rights, or give me back all my papers, and I'll look after them myself."
"You are very welcome to your papers," said Edgar. "I have written to
Mr. Arden, to ask him to see me, but that is not on your account. I will
give you, if you please, everything back."
This did not content the impatient sufferer.
"Oh! I don't want them back," she said, pettishly--"I want you to push
on--to push on! I'm tired of this life--I should like to try what a
change would do. If he does not choose to take me home, he might take me
to Italy, or somewhere out of these east winds. I've got copies all
ready directed to send to his lawyers, in case you should play me false,
or delay. I'm not going to die, don't you think it; but now I've made up
my mind to it, I'll have my rights!"
"I hope you will take care of yourself in the meantime," said Edgar,
compassionately, looking at her with a somewhat melancholy face.
"Oh! get along with your doleful looks," said Miss Lockwood, "trying to
frighten me, like all the rest. I want a change--that's what I
want--change of air and scene. I want to go to Italy or somewhere. Push
on--push on, and get it settled. I don't want your sympathy--that's
what I want of you."
Edgar heard her cough echo after him as he went along the long narrow
passage, where he had met Gussy, back to Mr. Tottenham's room. His
patron called him from within as he was passing by.
"Earnshaw!" he cried, dropping his voice low, "I have not asked you
yet--how did you get on, poor fellow, up at the Square?"
"I don't quite know," said Edgar--"better than I hoped; but I must see
Mr. Thornleigh, or write to him. Which will be the best?"
"Look here," said Mr. Tottenham, "I'll do that for you. I know
Thornleigh; he's not a bad fellow at bottom, except when he's worried.
He sees when a thing's no use. I daresay he'd make a stand, if there was
any hope; but as you're determined, and Gussy's determined----"
"We are," said Edgar. "Don't think I don't grudge her as much as anyone
can to poverty and namelessness; but since it is her choice----"
"So did Mary," said Mr. Tottenham, following out his own thoughts, with
a comprehensible disregard of grammar. "They stood out as long as they
could, but they had to give in at last; and so must everybody give in at
last, if only you hold to it. That's the secret--stick to it!--nothing
can stand against that." He wrung Edgar's hand, and patted him on the
back, by way of encouragement. "But don't tell anyone I said so," he
added, nodding, with a humorous gleam out of his grey eyes.
Edgar found more letters awaiting him at his club--letters of the same
kind as yesterday's, which he read with again a totally changed
sentiment. Clare had gone into the background, Gussy had come uppermost.
He read them eagerly, with his mind on the stretch to see what might be
made of them. Everybody was kind. "Tell us what you can do--how we can
help you," they said. After all, it occurred to him now, in the
practical turn his mind had taken, "What could he do?" The answer was
ready--"Anything." But then this was a very vague answer, he suddenly
felt; and to identify any one thing or other that he could do, was
difficult. He was turning over the question deeply in his mind, when a
letter, with Lord Newmarch's big official seal, caught his eye. He
opened it hurriedly, hoping to find perhaps a rapid solution of his
difficulty there. It ran thus:--
"MY DEAR EARNSHAW,
"I am sorry to be obliged to inform you that, after keeping us in a
state of uncertainty for about a year, Runtherout has suddenly
announced to me that he feels quite well again, and means to resume
work at once, and withdraw his resignation. He attributes this
fortunate change in his circumstances to Parr's Life Pills, or
something equally venerable. I am extremely sorry for this
contretemps, which at once defeats my desire of serving you, and
deprives the department of the interesting information which I am
sure your knowledge of foreign countries would have enabled you to
transmit to us. The Queen's Messengers seem indeed to be in a
preternaturally healthy condition, and hold out few hopes of any
vacancy. Accept my sincere regrets for this disappointment, and if
you can think of anything else I can do to assist you, command my
services.
"Believe me, dear Earnshaw,
"Very truly yours,
"NEWMARCH.
"P.S.--What would you say to a Consulship?"
Edgar read this letter with a great and sharp pang of disappointment. An
hour before, had anyone asked him, he would have said he had no faith
whatever in Lord Newmarch; yet now he felt, by the keenness of his
mortification, that he had expected a great deal more than he had ever
owned even to himself. He flung the letter down on the table beside him,
and covered his face with his hands. It seemed to him that he had lost
one of the primary supports on which, without knowing, he had been
building of late. Now was there nothing before Gussy's betrothed--he who
had ventured to entangle her fate with his, and to ask of parents and
friends to bless the bargain--but a tutorship in a great house, and kind
Mr. Tottenham's favour, who was no great man, nor had any power, nor
anything but mere money. He could not marry Gussy upon Mr. Tottenham's
money, or take her to another man's house, to be a cherished and petted
dependent, as they had made him. I don't think it was till next day,
when again the wheel had gone momentarily round, and he had set out on
Clare's business, leaving Gussy behind him, that he observed the
pregnant and pithy postscript, which threw a certain gleam of light upon
Lord Newmarch's letter. "How should you like a Consulship?" Edgar had no
great notion what a Consulship was. What kind of knowledge or duties was
required for the humblest representative of Her Majesty, he knew almost
as little as if this functionary had been habitually sent to the moon.
"Should I like a Consulship?" he said to himself, as the cold, yet
cheerful sunshine of early Spring streamed over the bare fields and
hedgerows which swept past the windows of the railway carriage in which
he sat. A vague exhilaration sprang up in his mind--perhaps from that
thought, perhaps from the sunshine only, which always had a certain
enlivening effect upon this fanciful young man. Perhaps, after all,
though he did not at first know what it was, this was the thing that he
could do, and which all his friends were pledged to get for him. And
once again he forgot all about his present errand, and amused himself,
as he rushed along, by attempts to recollect what the Consul was like at
various places he knew where such a functionary existed, and what he
did, and how he lived. The only definite recollection in his mind was of
an office carefully shut up during the heat of the day, with cool, green
persiane all closed, a soft current of air rippling over a marble
floor, and no one visible but a dreamy Italian clerk, to tell when H. B.
M.'s official representative would be visible. "I could do that much,"
Edgar said to himself, with a smile of returning happiness; but what the
Consul did when he was visible, was what he did not know. No doubt he
would have to sing exceedingly small when there was an ambassador within
reach, or even the merest butterfly of an attach, but apart from such
gorgeous personages, the Consul, Edgar knew, had a certain importance.
This inquiry filled his mind with animation during all the long,
familiar journey towards Arden, which he had feared would be full of
painful recollections. He was almost ashamed of himself, when he stopped
at the next station before Arden, to find that not a single recollection
had visited him. Hope and imagination had carried the day over
everything else, and the problematical Consul behind his green
persiane had routed even Clare.
The letter, however, which had brought him here had been of a
sufficiently disagreeable kind to make more impression upon him. Arthur
Arden had never pretended to any loftiness of feeling, or even civility
towards his predecessor, and Edgar's note had called forth the following
response:--
"SIR,--I don't know by what claim you, an entire stranger to my
family, take it upon you to thrust yourself into my affairs. I have
had occasion to resent this interference before, and I am certainly
still less inclined to support it now. I know nothing of any
person named Lockwood, who can be of the slightest importance to
me. Nevertheless, as you have taken the liberty to mix yourself up
with some renewed annoyance, I request you will meet me on Friday,
at the 'Arden Arms,' at Whitmarsh, where I have some business--to
let me know at once what your principal means--I might easily add
to answer to me what you have to do with it, or with me, or my
concerns.
"A. ARDEN.
"P.S.--If you do not appear, I will take it as a sign that you have
thought better of it, and that the person you choose to represent
has come to her senses."
Edgar had been able to forget this letter, and the interview to which it
conducted him, thinking of his imaginary Consul! I think the reader will
agree with me that his mind must have been in a very peculiar condition.
He kept his great-coat buttoned closely up, and his hat down over his
eyes, as he got out at the little station. He was not known at
Whitmarsh, as he had been known at Arden, but still there was a chance
that some one might recognize him. The agreeable thoughts connected with
the Consul, fortunately, had left him perfectly cool, and when he got
out in Clare's county, on her very land, the feeling of the past began
to regain dominion over him. If he should meet Clare, what would she say
to him? Would she know him? would she recognize him as her brother, or
hold him at arm's length as a stranger? And what would she think, he
wondered, with the strangest, giddy whirling round of brain and mind, if
she knew that the dream of three years ago was, after all, to come true;
that, though Arden was not his, Gussy was his; and that, though she no
longer acknowledged him as her brother, Gussy had chosen him for her
husband. It was the only question there was any doubt about at one time.
Now it was the only thing that was true.
With this bewildering consciousness of the revolutions of time, yet the
steadfastness of some things which were above time, Edgar walked into
the little old-fashioned country inn, scarcely venturing to take off his
hat for fear of recognition, and was shown into the best parlour, where
Mr. Arden awaited him.
CHAPTER XV.
The Ardens.
Arthur Arden, Esq., of Arden, was a different man from the needy cousin
of the Squire, the hanger-on of society, the fine gentleman out at
elbows, whose position had bewildered yet touched the supposed legal
proprietor of the estates, and head of the family, during Edgar's brief
reign. A poor man knocking about the world, when he has once lost his
reputation, has no particular object to stimulate him to the effort
necessary for regaining it. But when a man who sins by will, and not by
weakness of nature, gains a position in which virtue is necessary and
becoming, and where vice involves a certain loss of prestige, nothing is
easier than moral reformation. Arthur Arden had been a strictly moral
man for all these years; he had given up all vagabond vices, the
peccadilloes of the Bohemian. He was rang in every sense of the word.
A more decorous, stately house was not in the county; a man more correct
in all his duties never set an example to a parish. I do not know that
the essential gain was very great. He took his vices in another way; he
was hard as the nether millstone to all who came in his way, grasping
and tyrannical. He did nothing that was not exacted from him, either by
law, or public opinion, or personal vanity; on every other side he was
in panoply of steel against all prayers, all intercessions, all
complaints.
Mrs. Arden made him an excellent wife. She was as proud as he was, and
held her head very high in the county. The Countess of Marchmont, Lord
Newmarch's mother, was nothing in comparison with Mrs. Arden of Arden.
But people said she was too cold in her manners ever to be popular. When
her husband stood for the county, and she had to show the ordinary
gracious face to all the farmers and farm-men, Clare's manners lost more
votes than her beauty and her family might have gained. She could not be
cordial to save her life. But then the Ardens were always cold and
proud--it was the characteristic of the family--except the last poor
fellow, who was everybody's friend, and turned out to be no Arden at
all, as anyone might have seen with half an eye.
Mr. Arden's horse and his groom were waiting in the stableyard of the
"Arden Arms." He himself, looking more gloomy than usual, had gone
upstairs to the best room, to meet the stranger, of whom all the "Arden
Arms" people felt vaguely that they had seen him before. The landlady,
passing the door, heard their voices raised high now and then, as if
there was some quarrel between them; but she was too busy to listen,
even had her curiosity carried her so far. When Mrs. Arden, driving
past, stopped in front of the inn, to ask for some poor pensioner in the
village, the good woman rushed out, garrulous and eager.
"The Squire is here, ma'am, with a gentleman. I heard him say as his
horse was dead beat, and as he'd have to take the train home. What a
good thing as you have come this way! Please now, as they've done their
talk, will your ladyship step upstairs?"
"If Mr. Arden is occupied with some one on business--" said Clare,
hesitating; but then it suddenly occurred to her that, as there had been
a little domestic jar that morning, it might be well to show herself
friendly, and offer to drive her husband home. "You are sure he is not
busy?" she said, doubtfully, and went upstairs with somewhat hesitating
steps. It was a strange thing for Mrs. Arden to do, but something
impelled her unconscious feet, something which the ancients would have
called fate, an impulse she could not resist. She knocked softly at the
door, but received no reply; and there was no sound of voices within to
make her pause. The "business," whatever it was, must surely be over.
Clare opened the door, not without a thrill at her heart, which she
could scarcely explain to herself, for she knew of nothing to make this
moment or this incident specially important. Her husband sat, with his
back to her, at the table, his head buried in his hands; near him,
fronting the door, his face very serious, his eyes shining with
indignant fire, stood Edgar. Edgar! The sight of him, so unexpected as
it was, touched her heart with a quick, unusual movement of warmth and
tenderness. She gave a sudden cry, and rushed into the room.
Arthur Arden raised his head from his hands at the sound of her
voice--he raised himself up, and glanced at her, half-stupefied.
"What has brought you here?" he cried, hoarsely.
But Clare had no eyes for him, for the moment. She went up to her
brother, who stood, scarcely advancing to meet her, with no light of
pleasure on his face at the sight of her. They had not met for three
years.
"Edgar!" she said, with pleasure so sudden that she had not time to
think whether it was right and becoming on the part of Mrs. Arden of
Arden to express such a sentiment. But, before she had reached him, his
pained and serious look, his want of all response to her warm
exclamation, and the curious atmosphere of agitation in the room,
impressed her in spite of herself. She stopped short, her tone changed,
the revulsion of feeling which follows an overture repulsed, suddenly
clouded over her face. "I see I am an intruder," she said. "I did not
mean to interfere with--business." Then curiosity got the upper hand.
She paused and looked at them--Edgar so determined and serious, her
husband agitated, sullen--and as pale as if he had been dying. "But what
business can there be between you two?" she asked, with a sharp tone of
anxiety in her voice. The two men were like criminals before her. "What
is it?--what is it?" she cried. "Something has happened. What brings you
two together must concern me."
"Go home, Clare, go home," said Arthur Arden, hoarsely. "We don't want
you here, to make things worse--go home."
She looked at Edgar--he shook his head and turned his eyes from her. He
had given her no welcome, no look even of the old affection. Clare's
blood was up.
"I have a right to know what has brought you together," she said,
drawing a chair to the table, and suddenly seating herself between them.
"I will go home when you are ready to come with me, Arthur. What is it?
for, whatever it is, I have a right to know."
Edgar came to her side and took her hand, which she gave to him almost
reluctantly, averting her face.
"Clare," he said, almost in a whisper, "this is the only moment for all
these years that I could not be happy to see you. Go home, for God's
sake, as he says----"
"I will not," said Clare. "Some new misfortune has occurred to bring you
two together. Why should I go home, to be wretched, wondering what has
happened? For my children's sake, I will know what it is."
Neither of them made her any answer. There were several papers lying on
the table between them--one a bulky packet, directed in what Clare knew
to be his solicitor's handwriting, to Arthur Arden. Miss Lockwood had
played Edgar false, and, even while she urged him on, had already placed
her papers in the lawyer's hands. Arden had thus known the full dangers
of the exposure before him, when, with some vague hopes of a
compromise, he had met Edgar, whom he insisted on considering Miss
Lockwood's emissary. He had been bidding high for silence, for
concealment, and had been compelled to stomach Edgar's indignant
refusal, which for the moment he dared not resent, when Clare thus burst
upon the scene. They were suddenly arrested by her appearance, stopped
in mid-career.
"Is it any renewal of the past?--any new discovery? Edgar, you have
found something out--you are, after all----"
He shook his head.
"Dear Clare, it is nothing about me. Let me come and see you after, and
tell you about myself. This is business-mere business," said Edgar,
anxiously. "Nothing," his voice faltered, "to interest you."
"You tell lies badly," she said; "and he says nothing. What does it
mean? What are these papers?--always papers--more papers--everything
that is cruel is in them. Must I look for myself?" she continued, her
voice breaking, with an agitation which she could not explain. She laid
her hand upon some which lay strewed open upon the table. She saw Edgar
watch the clutch of her fingers with a shudder, and that her husband
kept his eyes upon her with a strange, horrified watchfulness. He seemed
paralyzed, unable to interfere till she had secured them, when he
suddenly grasped her hand roughly, and cried, "Come, give them up; there
is nothing there for you!"
Clare was not dutiful or submissive by nature. At the best of times such
an order would have irritated rather than subdued her.
"I will not," she repeated, freeing her hand from the clutch that made
it crimson. Only one of the papers she had picked up remained, a scrap
that looked of no importance. She rose and hurried to the window with
it, holding it up to the light.
"She must have known it one day or other," said Edgar, speaking rather
to himself than to either of his companions. It was the only sound that
broke the silence. After an interval of two minutes or so, Clare came
back, subdued, and rather pale.
"This is a marriage certificate, I suppose," she said. "Yours, Arthur!
You were married, then, before? You might have told me. Why didn't you
tell me? I should have had no right to be vexed if I had known before."
"Clare!" he stammered, looking at her in consternation.
"Yes, I can't help being vexed," she said, her lip quivering a little,
"to find out all of a sudden that I am not the first. I think you should
have told me, Arthur, not left me to find it out. But, after all, it is
only a shock and a mortification, not a crime, that you should look so
frightened," she added, forcing a faint smile. "I am not a termagant, to
make your life miserable on account of the past." Here Clare paused,
looked from one to the other, and resumed, with a more anxious voice:
"What do you mean, both of you, by looking at me? Is there more behind?
Ay, I see!" her lip quivered more and more, her face grew paler, she
restrained herself with a desperate effort. "Tell me the worst," she
said, hurriedly. "There are other children, older than mine! My boy will
not be the heir?"
"Clare! Clare!" cried Edgar, putting his arm round her, forgetting all
that lay between them, tears starting to his eyes, "my dear, come away!
Don't ask any more questions. If you ever looked upon me as your
brother, or trusted me, come--come home, Clare."
She shook off his grasp impatiently, and turned to her husband.
"Arthur, I demand the truth from you," she cried. "Let no one interfere
between us. Is there--an older boy than mine? Let me hear the worst! Is
not my boy your heir?"
Arthur Arden, though he was not soft-hearted, uttered at this moment a
lamentable groan.
"I declare before God I never thought of it!" he cried. "I never meant
it for a marriage at all!"
"Marriage!" said Clare, looking at him like one bewildered.
"Marriage!--I am not talking of marriage! Is there--a boy--another
heir?"
And then again there was a terrible silence. The man to whom Clare
looked so confidently as her husband, demanding explanations from him,
shrank away from her, cowering, with his face hidden by his hands.
"Will no one answer me?" she said. Her face was ghastly with
suspense--every drop of blood seemed to have been drawn out of it. Her
eyes went from her husband to Edgar, from Edgar back to her husband.
"Tell me, yes or no--yes or no! I do not ask more!"
"Clare, it is not that! God forgive me! The woman is alive!" said Arthur
Arden, with a groan that seemed to come from the bottom of his heart.
"The woman is alive!" she cried, impatiently. "I am not asking about any
woman. What does he mean? The woman is alive!" She stopped short where
she stood, holding fast by the back of her chair, making an effort to
understand. "The woman! What woman? What does he mean?"
"His wife," said Edgar, under his breath.
Clare turned upon him a furious, fiery glance. She did not understand
him. She began to see strange glimpses of light through the darkness,
but she could not make out what it was.
"Will not you speak?" she cried piteously, putting her hand upon her
husband's shoulder. "Arthur, I forgive you for keeping it from me; but
why do you hide your face?--why do you turn away? All you can do for me
now is to tell me everything. My boy!--is he disinherited? Stop," she
cried wildly; "let me sit down. There is more--still more! Edgar, come
here, close beside me, and tell me in plain words. The woman! What does
he mean?"
"Clare," cried Edgar, taking her cold hands into his, "don't let it kill
you, for your children's sake. They have no one but you. The woman--whom
he married then--is living now."
"The woman--whom he married then!" she repeated, with lips white and
stammering. "The woman!" Then stopped, and cried out suddenly--"My God!
my God!"
"Clare, before the Lord I swear to you I never meant it--I never thought
of it!" exclaimed Arden, with a hoarse cry.
Clare took no notice; she sat with her hands clasped, staring blankly
before her, murmuring, "My God! my God!" under her breath. Edgar held
her hands, which were chill and trembled, but she did not see him. He
stood watching her anxiously, fearing that she would faint or fall. But
Clare was not the kind of woman who faints in a great emergency. She sat
still, with the air of one stupefied; but the stupor was only a kind of
external atmosphere surrounding her, within the dim circle of which--a
feverish circle--thought sprang up, and began to whirl and twine. She
thought of everything all in a moment--her children first, who were
dishonoured; and Arden, her home, where she had been born; and her life,
which would have to be wrenched up--plucked like a flower from the soil
in which she had bloomed all her life. They could not get either sound
or movement from her, as she sat there motionless. They thought she was
dulled in mind by the shock, or in body, and that it was a merciful
circumstance to deaden the pain, and enable them to get her home.
While she sat thus, her husband raised himself in terror, and consulted
Edgar with his eyes.
"Take her home--take her home," he whispered behind Clare's back--"take
her home as long as she's quiet; and till she's got over the shock,
I'll keep myself out of the way."
Clare heard him, even through the mist that surrounded her, but she
could not make any reply. She seemed to have forgotten all about him--to
have lost him in those mists. When Edgar put his hand on her shoulder,
and called her gently, she stirred at last, and looked up at him.
"What is it?--what do you want with me?" she asked.
"I want you to come home," he said softly. "Come home with me; I will
take care of you; it is not a long drive."
Poor Edgar! he was driven almost out of his wits, and did not know what
to say. She shuddered with a convulsive trembling in all her limbs.
"Home!--yes, I must go and get my children," she said. "Yes, you are
quite right. I want some one to take care of me. I must go and get my
children; they are so young--so very young! If I take them at once, they
may never know----"
"Clare," cried her husband, moaning, "you won't do anything rash? You
won't expose our misery to all the world?"
She cast a quick glance at him--a glance full of dislike and horror.
"Take me away," she said to Edgar--"take me away! I must go and fetch
the children before it is dark." This with a pause and a strange little
laugh. "I speak as if they had been out at some baby-party," she said.
"Give me your arm. I don't see quite clear."
Arden watched them as they went out of the room--she tottering, as she
leant on Edgar's arm, moving as he moved, like one blind. Arthur Arden
was left behind with his papers, and with the thought of that other
woman, who had claimed him for her husband. How clearly he remembered
her--her impertinence, her rude carelessness, her manners, that were of
the shop, and knew no better training! Their short life together came
back to him like a picture. How soon his foolish passion for her (as he
described it to himself) had blown over!--how weary of her he had grown!
And now, what was to become of him? If Clare did anything desperate--if
she went and blazoned it about, and removed the children, and took the
whole matter in a passionate way, it would not be she alone who would be
the sufferer. The woman is the sufferer, people say, in such cases; but
this man groaned when he thought, if he could not do something to avert
it, what ruin must overtake him. If Clare left his house, all honour,
character, position would go with her; he could never hold up his head
again. He would retain everything he had before, yet he would lose
everything--not only her and his children, of whom he was as fond as it
was possible to be of any but himself, but every scrap of popular
regard, society, the support of his fellows. All would go from him if
this devil could not be silenced--if Clare could not be conciliated.
He rose to his feet, feeling sick and giddy, and from a corner, behind
the shadow of the window-curtains, saw his wife--that is, the woman who
was no longer his wife--drive away from the door. He was so wretched
that he could not even relieve his mind by swearing at Edgar. He had not
energy enough to think of Edgar, or any one else. Sometimes, indeed,
with a sharp pang, there would gleam across him a sudden vision of his
little boy, Clare's son, the beautiful child he had been so proud of,
but who--even if Clare should make it up, and brave the shame and
wrong--was ruined and disgraced, and no more the heir of Arden than any
beggar on the road. Poor wretch! when that thought came across him, I
think all the wrongs that Arthur Arden had done in this world were
avenged. He writhed under the sudden thought. He burst out in sudden
crying and sobbing for one miserable moment. It was intolerable--he
could not bear it; yet had to bear it, as we all have, whether our
errors are of our own making or not.
And Clare drove back over the peaceful country, beginning to green over
faintly under the first impulse of Spring--between lines of ploughed and
grateful fields, and soft furrows of soft green corn. She did not even
put her veil down, but with her white face set, and her eyes gazing
blankly before her, went on with her own thoughts, saying nothing,
seeing nothing. All her faculties had suddenly been concentrated within
her--her mind was like a shaded lamp for the moment, throwing intense
light upon one spot, and leaving all others in darkness. Edgar held her
hand, to which she did not object, and watched her with a pity which
swelled his heart almost to bursting. He could take care of her
tenderly in little things--lift her out of the carriage, give her the
support of his arm, throw off the superabundant wraps that covered her.
But this was all; into the inner world, where she was fighting her
battle, neither he nor any man could enter--there she had to fight it
out alone.
CHAPTER XVI.
The Old Home.
Clare went to her own room, and shut herself up there. She permitted
Edgar to go with her to the door, and there dismissed him, almost
without a word. What Edgar's feelings were on entering the house where
he had once been master, and with which so many early associations both
of pleasure and pain were connected, I need not say; he was excited
painfully and strangely by everything he saw. It seemed inconceivable to
him that he should be there; and every step in the staircase, every turn
in the corridor, reminded him of something that had happened in that
brief bit of the past in which his history was concentrated, which had
lasted so short a time, yet had been of more effect than many years. The
one thing, however, that kept him calm, and restrained his excitement,
was the utter absorption of Clare in her own troubles, which were more
absorbing than anything that had ever happened to him. She showed no
consciousness that it was anything to him to enter this house, to lead
her through its familiar passages. She ignored it so completely that
Edgar, always impressionable, felt half ashamed of himself for
recollecting, and tried to make believe, even to himself, that he
ignored it too. He took her to the door of her room, his head throbbing
with the sense that he was here again, where he had never thought to be;
and then went downstairs, to wait in the room which had once been his
own library, for Arthur Arden's return. Fortunately the old servants
were all gone, and if any of the present household recognised Edgar at
all, their faces were unfamiliar to him. How strange to look round the
room, and note with instinctive readiness all the changes which another
man's taste had made! The old cabinet, in which the papers had been
found which proved him no Arden, stood still against the wall, as it had
always done. The books looked neglected in their shelves, as though no
one ever touched them. It was more of a business room than it once was,
less of a library, nothing at all of the domestic place, dear to man and
woman alike, which it had been when Edgar never was so happy as with his
sister beside him. How strange it was to be there--how dismal to be
there on such an errand. In this room Clare had given him the papers
which were his ruin; here she had entreated him to destroy them; here he
had made the discovery public; and now to think the day should have come
when he was here as a stranger, caring nothing for Arden, thinking only
how to remove her of whom he seemed to have become the sole brother and
protector, from the house she had been born in!
He walked about and about the rooms, till the freshness of these
associations was over, and he began to grow impatient of the stillness
and suspense. He had told Clare that he would wait, and that she should
find him there when he was wanted. He had begged her to do nothing that
night--to wait and consider what was best; but he did not even know
whether she was able to understand him, or if he spoke to deaf ears.
Everything had happened so quickly that a sense of confusion was in
Edgar's mind, confusion of the moral as well as the mental functions;
for he was not at all sure whether the link of sympathetic horror and
wonder between Arden and himself, as to what Clare would do, did not
approach him closer, rather than separate him further from this man, who
hated him, to begin with, and who was yet not his sister's husband.
Somehow these two, who, since they first met, had been at opposite poles
from each other, seemed to be drawn together by one common misfortune,
rather than placed in a doubly hostile position, as became the injurer
and the defender of the injured.
When Arden came in some time after, this feeling obliterated on both
sides the enmity which, under any other circumstances, must have blazed
forth. Edgar, as he looked at the dull misery in Arthur's face, felt a
strange pity for him soften his heart. This man, who had done so well
for himself, who had got Arden, who had married Clare, who had received
all the gifts that heaven could give, what a miserable failure he was
after all, cast down from all that made his eminence tenable or good to
hold. He was the cause of the most terrible misfortune to Clare and her
children, and yet Edgar felt no impulse to take him by the throat, but
was sorry for him in his downfall and misery. As for Arthur Arden, his
old dislike seemed exorcised by the same spirit. In any other
circumstances he would have resented Edgar's interference deeply--but
now a gloomy indifference to everything that could happen, except one
thing, had got possession of him.
"What does she mean to do?" he said, throwing himself into a chair. All
power of self-assertion had failed in him. It seemed even right and
natural to him that Edgar should know this better than he himself did,
and give him information what her decision was.
"I think," said Edgar, instinctively accepting the rle of adviser,
"that the best and most delicate thing you could do would be to leave
the house to her for a few days. Let it be supposed you have business
somewhere. Go to London, if you think fit, and investigate for yourself;
but leave Clare to make up her mind at leisure. It would be the most
generous thing to do."
Arthur stared at him blankly for a moment, with a dull suspicion in his
eyes at the strange, audacious calmness of the proposal. But seeing that
Edgar met his gaze calmly, and said these words in perfect
single-mindedness, and desire to do the best in the painful emergency,
he accepted them as they were given; and thus they remained together,
though they did not talk to each other, waiting for Clare's appearance,
or some intimation of what she meant to do, till darkness began to fall.
When it was nearly night a maid appeared, with a scared look in her
face, and that strange consciousness of impending evil which servants
often show, like animals, without a word being said to them--and brought
to Edgar the following little note from Clare:--
"I am not able to see you to-night; and I cannot decide where to go
without consulting you; besides that there are other reasons why I
cannot take the children away, as I intended, at once. I have gone up to
the nursery beside them, and will remain there until to-morrow. Tell him
this, and ask if we may remain so, in his house, without being molested,
till to-morrow."
Edgar handed this note to Arden without a word. He saw the quick flutter
of excitement which passed over Arthur's face. If the letter had been
more affectionate, I doubt whether Clare's husband could have borne it;
but as it was he gulped down his agitation, and read it without
betraying any angry feeling. When he had glanced it over, he looked
almost piteously at his companion.
"You think that is what I ought to do?" he said, almost with an appeal
against Edgar's decision. "Then I'll go; you can write and tell her so.
I'll stay away if she likes, until--until she wants me," he broke off
abruptly, and got up and left the room, and was audible a moment after,
calling loudly for his servant in the hall.
Edgar wrote this information to Clare. He told her that Arden had
decided to leave the house to her, that she might feel quite free to
make up her mind; and that he too would go to the village, where he
would wait her call, whensoever she should want him. He begged her once
more to compose herself, not to hasten her final decision, and to
believe that she would be perfectly free from intrusion or interference
of any kind--and bade God bless her, the only word of tenderness he
dared venture to add.
When he had written this, he walked down the avenue alone, in the dusk,
to the village. Arden had gone before him. The lodge-gates had been left
open, and gave to the house a certain forlorn air of openness to all
assault, which, no doubt, existed chiefly in Edgar's fancy, but
impressed him more than I can say. To walk down that avenue at all was
for him a strange sensation; but Edgar by this time had got over all the
weaknesses of recollection. It was not hard for him at any time to put
himself to one side. He did it now completely. He felt like a man
walking in a dream; but he no longer consciously recalled to himself the
many times he had gone up and down there, and how it had once been to
him his habitual way home--the entrance to his kingdom. No doubt in his
painful circumstances these thoughts would have been hard upon him. They
died quite naturally out of his mind now. What was to become of
Clare?--where could he best convey her for shelter or safety?--and how
provide for her? His own downfall had made Clare penniless, and now that
she was no longer Arthur Arden's wife, she could and would, he knew,
accept nothing from him. How was she to be provided for? This was a
far more important question to think of than any maunderings of personal
regret over the associations of his past life.
Next morning he went up again to the Hall, after a night passed not very
comfortably at the "Arden Arms," where everyone looked at him curiously,
recognising him, but not venturing to say so. As he went up the avenue,
Arthur Arden overtook him, arriving, too, from a different direction. A
momentary flash of indignation came over Edgar's face.
"You promised to leave Arden," he said.
"And so I did," said the other. "But I did not say I would not come back
to hear what she said. My God, I may have been a fool, but may I not see
my--my own children before they go? I am not made of wood or stone, do
you suppose, though I may have been in the wrong?"
His eyes were red and bloodshot, his appearance neglected and wild. He
looked as if he had not slept, nor even undressed, all night.
"Look here," he said hoarsely, "I have got another letter, saying she
would accept money--a compromise. Will you persuade Clare to stay, and
make no exposure, and hush it all up, for the sake of the children--if
we have her solemnly bound over to keep the secret and get her sent
away? Will you? What harm could it do you? And it might be the saving of
the boy."
"Arden, I pity you from my heart!" said Edgar; "but I could not give
such advice to Clare."
"It's for the boy," cried Arden. "Look here. We've never been friends,
you and I, and it's not natural we should be; but that child shall be
brought up to think more of you than of any man on earth--to think of
you as his friend, his--well, his uncle, if you will. Grant that I'm
done for in this world, and poor Clare too, poor girl; but, Edgar, if
you liked, you might save the boy."
"By falsehood," said Edgar, his heart wrung with sympathetic
emotion--"by falsehood, as I was myself set up, till the time came, and
I fell. Better, surely, that he should be trained to bear the worst. You
would not choose for him such a fate as mine?"
"It has not done you any harm," said Arden, looking keenly at the man he
had dispossessed--from whom he had taken everything. "You have always
had the best of it!" he cried, with sudden fire. "You have come out of
it all with honour, while everyone else has had a poor enough part to
play. But in this case," he added, anxiously, in a tone of conciliation,
"nothing of the kind can happen. Who like her son and mine could have
the right here--every right of nature, if not the legal right? And I
declare to you, before God, that I never meant it. I never intended to
marry--that woman."
"You intended only to betray her." It was on Edgar's lips to say these
words, but he had not the heart to aggravate the misery which the
unhappy man was already suffering. They went on together to the house,
Arden repeating at intervals his entreaties, to which Edgar could give
but little answer. He knew very well Clare would listen to no such
proposal; but so strangely did the pity within him mingle with all less
gentle sentiments, that Edgar's friendly lips could not utter a harsh
word. He said what he could, rather, to soothe; for, after all, his
decision was of little importance, and Clare did not take the matter so
lightly as to make a compromise a possible thing to think of.
The house had already acquired something of that look of agitation which
steals so readily into the atmosphere wherever domestic peace is
threatened. There were two or three servants in the hall, who
disappeared in different directions when the gentlemen were seen
approaching; and Edgar soon perceived, by the deference with which he
himself was treated, that the instinct of the household had jumped to a
conclusion very different from the facts, but so pleasing to the
imagination as to be readily received. He had been recognised, and it
was evident that he was thought to be "righted," to have got "his own
again." Arthur Arden was anything but beloved at home, and the popular
heart as well as imagination sprang up, eager to greet the return of the
real master, the true heir.
"Mrs. Arden, sir, has ordered the carriage to meet the twelve o'clock
train. She's in the morning-room, sir," said the butler, with solemnity.
He spoke to Arthur, but he looked at Edgar. They were all of one way of
thinking; further evidence had been found out, or something had occurred
to turn the wheel of fortune, and Edgar had been restored to "his own."
Clare was seated alone, dressed for a journey, in the little room which
had always been her favourite room. She was dressed entirely in black,
which made her extraordinary paleness more visible. She had always been
pale, but this morning her countenance was like marble--not a tinge of
colour on it, except the pink, pale also, of her lips. She received them
with equal coldness, bending her head only when the two men, both of
them almost speechless with emotion, came into her presence. She was
perfectly calm; that which had befallen her was too tremendous for any
display of feeling; it carried her beyond the regions of feeling into
those of the profoundest passion--that primitive, unmingled condition of
mind which has to be diluted with many intricate combinations before it
drops into ordinary, expressible emotion. Clare had got beyond the pain
that could be put into words, or cries or tears; she was stern, and
still, and cold, like a woman turned to stone.
"I want to explain what I am about to do," she said, in a low tone. "We
are leaving, of course, at once. Mr. Arden" (her voice faltered for one
moment, but then grew more steady than ever), "I have taken with me what
money I have; there is fifty pounds--I will send it back to you when I
have arranged what I am to do. You will wish to see the children; they
are in the nursery waiting. Edgar will go with me to town, and help me
to find a place to live in. I do not wish to make any scandal, or cause
any anxiety. Of course I cannot change my name, as it is my own name,
as well as yours, and my children will be called what their mother is
called, as I believe children in their unfortunate position always are."
"Clare, for God's sake do not be so pitiless! Hear me speak. I have
much--much to say to you. I have to beg your pardon on my knees----"
"Don't!" she cried suddenly; then went on in her calm tone--"We are past
all the limits of the theatre, Mr. Arden," she said. "Your knees can do
me no good, nor anything else. All that is over. I cannot either upbraid
or pardon. I will try to forget your existence, and you will forget
mine."
"That is impossible!" he cried, going towards her. His eyes were so
wild, and his manner so excited, that Edgar drew near to her in terror;
but Clare was not afraid. She looked up at him with the large, calm,
dilated eyes, which seemed larger and bluer than ever, out of the
extreme whiteness of her face.
"When I swear to you that I never meant it, that I am more wretched--far
more wretched--than you can be--that I would hang myself, or drown
myself like a dog, if that would do any good----!"
"Nothing can do any good," said Clare. Something like a moan escaped
from her breast. "What are words?" she went on, with a certain
quickening of excitement. "I could speak too, if it came to that. There
is nothing--nothing to be said or done. Edgar, when one loses name and
fame, and home, you know what to do."
"I know what I did; but I am different from you," said Edgar--"you, with
your babies. Clare, let us speak; we are not stones--we are men."
"Ah! stones are better than men--less cruel, less terrible!" she cried.
"No, no; I cannot bear it. We will go in silence; there is nothing that
anyone can say."
"You see," said Edgar, turning to Arden--"what is my advice or my
suggestions now? To speak of compromise or negotiation----"
"Compromise!" said Clare, her pale cheek flaming; she rose up with a
sudden impulse of insupportable passion--"compromise!--to me!" Then,
turning to Edgar, she clutched at his arm, and he felt what force she
was putting upon herself, and how she trembled. "Come," she said, "this
air kills me; take me away!"
He let her guide him, not daring to oppose her, out to the air--to the
door, down the great steps. She faltered more and more at every step she
took, then, suddenly stopping, leaned against him.
"Let me sit down somewhere. I am growing giddy," she said.
She sat down on the steps, on the very threshold of the home she was
quitting, as she thought, for ever. The servants, in a group behind,
tried to gaze over their master's shoulders at this extraordinary scene.
Where was she going?--what did she mean? There was a moment during which
no one spoke, and Clare, to her double horror, felt her senses forsaking
her. Her head swam, the light fluttered in her eyes. A moment more, and
she would be conscious of nothing round her. I have said she was not the
kind of woman who faints at a great crisis, but the body has its
revenges, its moments of supremacy, and she had neither slept nor
eaten, neither rested nor forgotten, for all these hours.
It was at this moment that the messenger from the "Arden Arms," a boy,
whom no one had noticed coming up the avenue, thrust something into
Edgar's hand.
"Be that for you, sir?" said the boy.
The sound of this new, strange voice roused everybody. Clare came out of
her half-faint, and regained her full sense of what was going on, though
she was unable to rise. Arthur Arden came close to them down the steps,
with wild eagerness in his eyes. Edgar only would have thrust the paper
away which was put into his hands. "Tush!" he said, with the momentary
impulse of tossing it from him; then, suddenly catching, as it were, a
reflection of something new possible in Arden's wild look, and even a
gleam of some awful sublime of tragic curiosity in the opening eyes of
Clare, he looked at the paper itself, which came to him at that moment
of fate. It was a telegram, in the vulgar livery which now-a-days the
merest trifles and the most terrible events wear alike in England. He
tore it open; it was from Mr. Tottenham, dated that morning, and
contained these words only:--
"Miss Lockwood died here at nine o'clock."
Edgar thrust it into Arden's hand. He felt something like a wild sea
surging in his ears; he raised up Clare in his arms, and drew her
wondering, resisting, up the great steps.
"Come back," he cried--"come home, Clare."
CHAPTER XVII.
Harry's Turn.
It would be vain to tell all that was said, and all that was done, and
all the calculations that were gone through in the house in Berkeley
Square, where Edgar's visit had produced so much emotion. The interviews
carried on in all the different rooms would furnish forth a volume. The
girls, who had peered over the staircase to see him go away, and whose
state of suspense was indescribable, made a dozen applications at
Gussy's door before the audience of Ada, who had the best right to hear,
was over. Then Mary insisted upon getting admission in her right of
bride, as one able to enter into Gussy's feelings, and sympathise with
her; and poor little Beatrice, left out in the cold, had to content
herself with half a dozen words, whispered in the twilight, when they
all went to dress for dinner. Beatrice cried with wounded feeling, to
think that because she, by the decrees of Providence, was neither the
elder sister, nor engaged to be married, she was therefore to be shut
out from all participation in Gussy's secrets.
"Could I be more interested if I was twice as old as Ada, and engaged to
six Lord Grantons!" cried the poor child. And Gussy's prospects were in
that charming state of uncertainty that they would stand discussing for
hours together; whereas, by the time Lord Granton had been pronounced a
darling, and the dresses all decided upon, even down to the colour of
the bridesmaids' parasols, there remained absolutely nothing new to be
gone over with Mary, but just the same thing again and again.
"When do you think you shall be married?" said Beatrice, tremulously.
"I don't know, and I don't very much care, so long as it is all right,"
said Gussy, half laughing, half crying.
"But what if papa will not consent?" said Mary, with a face of awe.
"Papa is too sensible to fight when he knows he should not win the
battle," said the deliciously, incomprehensibly courageous Gussy.
There was some gratification to be got out of a betrothed sister of this
fashion. Beatrice even began to look down upon Mary's unexciting loves.
"As for your affair, it is so dreadfully tame," she said, contemptuously
lifting her little nose in the air. "Everybody rushing to give their
consent, and presents raining down upon you, and you all so
self-satisfied and confident."
Mary was quite taken down from her pedestal of universal observation.
She became the commonest of young women about to be married, by Gussy's
romantic side.
Alas! the Thornleighs were by no means done with sensation in this
genre. Two days after these events, before Edgar had come back, Harry
came early to the house one morning and asked to see his mother alone.
Lady Augusta was still immersed in patterns, and she had that morning
received a letter from her husband, which had brought several lines upon
her forehead. Mr. Thornleigh had the reputation, out of doors, of being
a moderate, sensible sort of man, not apt to commit himself, though
perhaps not brilliant, nor very much to be relied upon in point of
intellect. He deserved, indeed, to a considerable extent this character;
but what the world did not know, was that his temper was good and
moderate, by reason of the domestic safety-valve which he had always by
him. When anything troublesome occurred he had it out with his wife,
giving her full credit for originating the whole business.
"You ought to have done this, or you ought to have done that," he would
say, "and then, of course, nothing of the kind could have happened."
After, he would go upstairs, and brush his hair, and appear as the most
sensible and good-tempered of men before the world. Mr. Thornleigh had
got Mr. Tottenham's letter informing him of the renewed intercourse
between Edgar and Gussy; and the Squire had, on the spot, indited a
letter to his wife, breathing fire and flame. This was the preface of a
well-conditioned, gentlemanly letter to Mr. Tottenham, in which the
father expressed a natural regret that Gussy should show so little
consideration of external advantages, but fully acknowledged Edgar's
excellent qualities, and asked what his prospects were, and what he
thought of doing.
"I will never be tyrannical to any of my children," Mr. Thornleigh
said; "but, on the other hand, before I can give my sanction, however
unwillingly, to any engagement, I must fully understand his position,
and what he expects to be able to do."
But Lady Augusta's letter was not couched in these calm and friendly
terms; and knowing as she did the exertions she had made to keep Edgar
at arm's length, poor Lady Augusta felt that she did not deserve the
assault made upon her, and consequently took longer to calm down than
she generally did. It was while her brow was still puckered, and her
cheek flushed with this unwelcome communication, that Harry came in.
When he said, "I want to speak to you, mother," her anxious mind already
jumped at some brewing harm. She took him into the deserted library,
feeling that this was the most appropriate place in which to hear any
confession her son might have to make to her. The drawing-room, where
invasion was always to be feared, and the morning-room, which was
strewed with patterns and girls, might do very well for the confession
of feminine peccadilloes, but a son's ill-doing was to be treated with a
graver care. She led Harry accordingly into the library, and put herself
into his father's chair, and said, "What is it, my dear boy?" with a
deeper gravity than usual. Not that Harry was to be taken in by such
pretences at severity. He knew his mother too well for that.
"Mother," he said, sitting down near her, but turning his head partially
away from her gaze, "you have often said that my father wanted me--to
marry."
"To marry!--why, Harry? Yes, dear, and so he does," said Lady Augusta;
"and I too," she added, less decidedly. "I wish it, too--if it is some
one very nice."
"Well," said Harry, looking at her with a certain shamefaced ostentation
of boldness, "I have seen some one whom I could marry at last."
"At last! You are not so dreadfully old," said the mother, with a smile.
"You, too! Well, dear, tell me who it is. Some one you have met at your
Aunt Mary's"? Oh! Harry, my dear boy, I trust most earnestly it is some
one very nice!"
"It is some one much better than nice--the most lovely creature, mother,
you ever saw in your life. I never even dreamt of anything like her,"
said Harry, with a sigh.
"I hope she is something more than a lovely creature," said Lady
Augusta. "Oh! Harry, your father is so put out about Gussy's business; I
do hope, dear, that this is something which will put him in good-humour
again. I can take her loveliness for granted. Tell me--do tell me who
she is?"
"You don't mean to say that you are going to let that fellow marry
Gussy'?" said Harry, coming to a sudden pause.
"Harry, if this is such a connection as I hope, it will smooth
everything," said Lady Augusta. "My dearest boy, tell me who she is."
"She is the only woman I will ever marry," said Harry, doggedly.
And then his poor mother divined, without further words, that the match
was not an advantageous one, and that she had another disappointment on
her hands.
"Harry, you keep me very anxious. Is she one of Mary's neighbours? Tell
me her name."
"Yes, she is one of Aunt Mary's neighbours and chief favourites," said
Harry. "Aunt Mary is by way of patronizing her." And here he laughed;
but the laugh was forced, and had not the frank amusement in it which he
intended it to convey.
Lady Augusta's brow cleared for a moment, then clouded again.
"You do not mean Myra Witherington?" she said, faintly. "Oh! not one of
that family, I hope!"
"Myra Witherington!" he cried. "Mother, what do you take me for? It is
clear you know nothing about my beautiful Margaret. In her presence, you
would no more notice Myra Witherington than a farthing candle in the
sun!"
Poor Lady Augusta took courage again. The very name gave her a little
courage. It is the commonest of all names where Margaret came from; but
not in England, where its rarity gives it a certain distinction.
"My dear boy," she said tremulously, "don't trifle with me--tell me her
name."
A strange smile came upon Harry's lips. In his very soul he, too, was
ashamed of the name by which some impish trick of fortune had shadowed
his Margaret. An impulse came upon him to get it over at once; he felt
that he was mocking both himself and his mother, and her, the most of
all, who bore that terrible appellation. He burst into a harsh, coarse
laugh, a bravado of which next moment he was heartily ashamed.
"Her name," he said, with another outburst, "is--Mrs. Smith!"
"Good heavens, Harry!" cried Lady Augusta, with a violent start. Then
she tried to take a little comfort from his laughter, and said, with a
faint smile, though still trembling, "You are laughing at me, you unkind
boy!"
"I am not laughing at all!" cried Harry, "except, indeed, at the
misfortune which gave her such a name. It is one of Aunt Mary's
favourite jokes." Then he changed his tone, and took his mother's hand
and put it up caressingly to his cheek to hide the hot flush that
covered it. "Mother, you don't know how I love her. She is the only
woman I will ever marry, though I should live a hundred years."
"Oh! my poor boy--my poor boy!" cried Lady Augusta. "This is all I
wanted to make an end of me. I think my heart will break!"
"Why should your heart break?" said Harry, putting down her hand and
looking half cynically at her. "What good will that do? Look here,
mother. Something much more to the purpose will be to write to my
father, and break the news quietly to him--gently, so as not to bother
him, as I have done to you; you know how."
"Break the news to him!" she said. "I have not yet realised it myself.
Harry, wait a little. Why, she is not even----. Mrs. Smith! You mean
that she is a widow, I suppose?"
"You did not think I could want to marry a wife, did you?" he growled.
"What is the use of asking such useless questions? Of course she is a
widow--with one little girl. There, now you know the worst!"
"A widow, with one little girl!"
Lady Augusta looked at him aghast. What could make up for these
disadvantages? The blood went back upon her heart, then rallied slightly
as she remembered her brother-in-law's shopkeeping origin, and that the
widow might be some friend of his.
"Is she--very rich?" she stammered.
To do her justice, she was thinking then of her husband, not herself;
she was thinking how she could write to him, saying, "These are terrible
drawbacks, but nevertheless----"
But nevertheless--Harry burst into another loud, coarse laugh. Poor
fellow! nobody could feel less like laughing; he did it to conceal his
confusion a little, and the terrible sense he began to have that, so far
as his father and mother were concerned, he had made a dreadful mistake.
"I don't know how rich she is, nor how poor. That is not what I ever
thought of," he cried, with lofty scorn.
This somehow appeased the gathering terror of Lady Augusta.
"I don't suppose you did think of it," she said; "but it is a thing your
father will think of. Harry, tell me in confidence--I shall never think
you mercenary--what is her family? Are they rich people? Are they
friends of your uncle Tottenham? Dear Harry, why should you make a
mystery of this with me?"
"Listen, then," he said, setting his teeth, "and when you know
everything you will not be able to ask any more questions. She is a
cousin of your Edgar's that you are so fond of. Her brother is the new
doctor at Harbour Green, and she lives with him. There, now you know as
much as I know myself."
Words would fail me to tell the wide-eyed consternation with which Lady
Augusta listened. It seemed to her that everything that was obnoxious
had been collected into this description. Poor, nobody, the sister of a
country doctor; a widow with a child; and finally, to wind up
everything, and make the combination still more and more terrible,
Edgar's cousin! Heaven help her! It was hard enough to think of this for
herself; but to let his father know!--this was more than any woman could
venture to do. She grew sick and faint in a horrible sense of the
desperation of the circumstances; the girls might be obstinate, but they
would not take the bit in their teeth and go off, determined to have
their way, like the boy, who was the heir, and knew his own importance;
and what could any exhortation of hers do for Harry, who knew as well as
she did the frightful consequences, and had always flattered himself on
being a man of the world? She was so stupefied that she scarcely
understood all the protestations that he poured into her ear after this.
What was it to her that Margaret was the loveliest creature in the
world? Faugh! Lady Augusta turned sickening from the words. Lovely
creatures who rend peaceful families asunder; who lead young men astray,
and ruin all their hopes and prospects; who heighten all existing
difficulties, and make everything that was bad before worse a thousand
times--is it likely that a middle-aged mother should be moved by their
charms?
"It is ruin and destruction!--ruin and destruction!" she repeated to
herself.
And soon the whole house had received the same shock, and trembled under
it to its foundations. Harry went off in high dudgeon, not finding the
sympathy he (strangely enough, being a man of the world) had looked
forward to as his natural right. The house, as I have said, quivered
with the shock; a sense of sudden depression came over them all. Little
Mary cried, thinking what a very poor-looking lot of relations she would
carry with her into the noble house she was about to enter. Gussy, with
a more real sense of the fatal effect of this last complication, felt,
half despairing, that her momentary gleam of hope was dying away in the
darkness, and began to think the absence of Edgar at this critical
moment almost a wrong to her. He had been absent for years, and she had
kept steadily faithful to him, hopeful in him; but his absence of to-day
filled her with a hopeless, nervous irritability and pain. As for Lady
Augusta, she lost heart altogether.
"Your father will never listen to it," she said--"never, never; he will
think they are in a conspiracy. You will be the sufferer, Gussy, you and
poor Edgar, for Harry will not be restrained; he will take his own way."
What could Gussy reply? She was older than Harry; she was sick of
coercion--why should not she, too, have her own way? But she did not say
this, being grieved for the unfortunate mother, whom this last shock had
utterly discomposed. Ada could do nothing but be the grieved spectator
and sympathizer of all; as for the young Beatrice, her mind was divided
between great excitement over the situation generally, and sorrow for
poor Gussy, and an illegitimate, anxious longing to see the "lovely
creature" of whom Harry had spoken in such raptures. Why should not
people love and marry, without all these frightful complications?
Beatrice was not so melancholy as the rest. She got a certain amount of
pleasure out of the imbroglio; she even hoped that for herself there
might be preparing something else even more romantic than Gussy's--more
desperate than Harry's. Fate, which had long forgotten the Thornleigh
household, and permitted them to trudge on in perfect quiet, had now
roused out of sleep, and seemed to intend to give them their turn of
excitement again.
Edgar made his appearance next day, looking so worn and fatigued that
Lady Augusta had not the heart to warn him, as she had intended to do,
that for the present she could not receive his visits--and that Gussy
had not the heart to be cross. He told them he had been to Arden on
business concerning Clare, and that Arthur Arden had come to town with
him, and that peace and a certain friendship reigned, at least for the
moment, between them. He did not confide even to Gussy what the cause of
this singular amity was; but after he had been a little while in her
company, his forehead began to smoothe, his smile to come back, the
colour to appear once more in his face. He took her aside to the window,
where the girls had been arranging fresh Spring flowers in a
jardinire. He drew her arm into his, bending over the hyacinths and
cyclamens. Now, for the first time, he could ask the question which had
been thrust out of his mind by all that had happened within the last few
days. A soft air of Spring, of happiness, of all the sweetness of life,
which had been so long plucked from him, seemed to blow in Edgar's face
from the flowers.
"How should we like a Consulship?" he said, bending down to whisper in
her ear.
"A what?" cried Gussy, astonished. She thought for the moment that he
was speaking of some new flower.
Then Edgar took Lord Newmarch's letter from his pocket, and held out the
postscript to her, holding her arm fast in his, and his head close to
hers.
"How should you like a Consulship?" he said.
Then the light and the life in his face communicated itself to her.
"A Consulship! Oh! Edgar, what does it mean?"
"To me it means you," he said--"it means life; it means poverty too,
perhaps, and humility, which are not what I would choose for my Gussy;
but to me it means life, independence, happiness. Gussy, what am I to
say?"
"Say!" she cried--"yes, of course--yes. What else? Italy, perhaps, and
freedom--freedom once in our lives--and our own way; but, ah! what is
the use of speaking of it?" said Gussy, dropping away from his arm, and
stamping her foot on the ground, and falling into sudden tears, "when we
are always to be prevented by other people's folly, always stopped by
something we have nothing to do with? Ask mamma, Edgar, what has
happened since you went away."
Then Lady Augusta drew near, having been a wondering and somewhat
anxious spectator all the time of this whispered conversation, and told
him with tears of her interview with Harry.
"What can I do?" she cried. "I do not want to say a word against your
cousin. She may be nice, as nice as though she were a duke's daughter;
but Harry is our eldest son, and all my children have done so badly in
this way except little Mary. Oh! my dears, I beg your pardon!" cried
poor Lady Augusta, drying her eyes, "but what can I say? Edgar, I have
always felt that I could ask you to do anything, if things should ever
be settled between Gussy and you. Oh! save my boy! She cannot be very
fond of him, she has known him so little; and his father will be
furious, and will never consent--never! And until Mr. Thornleigh dies,
they would have next to nothing, Oh! Edgar, if she is sensible, and
would listen to reason, I would go to her myself--or Gussy could go."
"Not I," said Gussy, stealing a deprecating look at Edgar, who stood
stupefied by this new complication--"how could I? It is terrible. How
can I, who am pleasing myself, say anything to Harry because he wants to
please himself?--or to her, who has nothing to do with our miserable
and mercenary ways? Oh! yes, they are miserable and mercenary!" cried
Gussy, crying in her turn; "though I can't help feeling as you do,
though my mind revolts against this poor girl, whom I don't know, and I
want to save Harry, too, as you say. But how dare I make Harry unhappy,
in order to be happy myself? Oh! mamma, seek some other messenger--not
me!--not me!"
"My darling," said Lady Augusta, "it is for Harry's good."
"And it was for my good a little while ago!" cried Gussy. "You meant it,
and so did they all. If you could have persuaded me to marry some one I
cared nothing for, with my heart always longing for another, you would
have thought it for my good; and now must I try to buy my happiness by
ruining Harry's?" cried the girl; "though I, too, am so dreadful, that I
think it would be for Harry's good. Oh! no, no, let it be some one
else!"
"Edgar," said Lady Augusta, "speak to her, show her the difference.
Harry never saw this--this young woman till about a fortnight since.
What can he know of her, what can she know of him, to be ready to marry
him in a fortnight? Oh! Edgar, try to save my boy! Even if you were to
represent to him that it would be kind to let your business be settled
first," she went on, after a pause. "A little time might do everything.
I hope it is not wrong to scheme a little for one's own children and
their happiness. You might persuade him to wait, for Gussy's sake--not
to make his father furious with two at a time."
Thus the consultation went on, if that could be called a consultation
where the advice was all on one side. Edgar was fairly stupefied by this
new twist in his affairs. He saw the fatal effect as clearly as even
Lady Augusta could see it, but he could not see his own way to interfere
in it, as she saw. To persuade Harry Thornleigh to give up or postpone
his own will, in order that he, Edgar Earnshaw, might get his--an object
in which Harry, first of all, had not the slightest sympathy--was about
as hopeless an attempt as could well be thought of; and what right had
he to influence Margaret, whom he did not know, to give up the brother,
in order that he himself might secure the sister? Edgar left the house
in as sore a dilemma as ever man was in. To give up Gussy now was a
simple impossibility, but to win her by persuading her brother to the
sacrifice of his love and happiness, was surely more impossible still.
CHAPTER XVIII.
Other People's Affairs.
Thus, after the long lull that had happened in his life, Edgar found
himself deep in occupation, intermingled in the concerns of many
different people. Arthur Arden had come with him to town, and, by some
strange operation of feeling, which it is difficult to follow, this man,
in his wretchedness, clung to Edgar, who might almost be supposed the
means of bringing it about. All his old jealousy, his old enmity, seemed
to have disappeared. He who had harshly declined to admit that the
relationship of habit and affection between his wife and her supposed
brother must survive even when it was known that no tie of blood existed
between them, acknowledged the fact now without question, almost with
eagerness, speaking to the man he had hated, and disowned all connection
with, of "your sister," holding by him as a link between himself and the
wife he had so nearly lost. This revolution was scarcely less wonderful
than the position in which Edgar found himself in respect to Clare. Not
a reference to their old affection had come from her lips, not a word of
present regard. She had scarcely even given him her hand voluntarily;
but she had accepted him at once and instinctively as her natural
support, her "next friend," whose help and protection she took as a
matter of course. Clare treated him as if his brotherhood had never been
questioned, as if he was her natural and legal defender and sustainer:
up to this moment she had not even opened her mind to him, or told him
what she meant to do, but she had so far accepted his guidance, and
still more accepted his support, without thanking him or asking him for
it, as a matter of course.
Edgar knew Clare too well to believe that when the marriage ceremony
should be repeated between her husband and herself--which was the next
step to be taken--their life would simply flow on again in the same
channel, as if this tragical interruption to its course had never
occurred. This was what Arthur Arden fondly pictured to himself, and a
great many floating intentions of being a better husband, and a better
man, after the salvation which had suddenly come to him, in the very
moment of his need, were in his mind, softening the man imperceptibly by
their influence. But Edgar did not hope for this; he made as little
answer as he could to Arthur's anticipations of the future, to his
remorseful desire to be friendly.
"After it's all over you must not drift out of sight again,--you must
come to us when you can," Arden said. "You've always behaved like a
brick in all circumstances; I see it now. You've been my best friend in
this terrible business. I wish I may never have a happy hour if I ever
think otherwise of you than as Clare's brother again."
All this Edgar did his best to respond to, but he could not but feel
that Arden's hopes were fallacies. Clare had given him no insight into
her plans, perhaps, even, had not formed any. She had gone back into the
house at Edgar's bidding; she had dully accepted the fact that the
situation was altered, and consented to the private repetition of her
marriage; but she had never looked at her husband, never addressed him;
and Edgar felt, with a shudder, that, though she would accept such
atonement as was possible, she was far, very far, from having arrived at
the state of mind which could forgive the injury. That a woman so deeply
outraged should continue tranquilly the life she had lived before she
was aware of the outrage, was, he felt, impossible. He had done what he
could to moderate Arden's expectations on this point, but with no
effect; and, as he did not really know, but merely feared, some
proceeding on Clare's part which should shatter the expected happiness
of the future, he held his peace, transferring, almost involuntarily, a
certain share of his sympathy to the guilty man, whose guilt was not to
escape retribution.
Edgar's next business was with Mr. Tottenham, who, all unaware of
Harry's folly, showed to him, with much pleasure, and some
self-satisfaction, the moderate and sensible letter of Mr. Thornleigh
above referred to, in which he expressed his natural regret, etc., but
requested to know what the young man's prospects were, and what he meant
to do. Then Edgar produced once more Lord Newmarch's letter, and, in the
consultation which followed, almost forgot, for the moment, all that
was against him. For Mr. Tottenham thought it a good opening enough, and
began, with sanguine good-nature, to prophesy that Edgar would soon
distinguish himself--that he would be speedily raised from post to post,
and that, "with the excellent connections and interest you will have,"
advancement of every kind would be possible.
"Why, in yesterday's Gazette," said Mr. Tottenham, "no farther gone,
there is an appointment of Brown, Consul-General, to be Ambassador
somewhere--Argentine States, or something of that sort. And why should
not you do as well as Brown? A capital opening! I should accept it at
once."
And Edgar did so forthwith, oblivious of the circumstance that the
Consulship, such as it was, the first step upon the ladder, had been,
not offered, but simply suggested to him--nay, scarcely even that. This
little mistake, however, was the best thing that could have happened;
for Lord Newmarch, though at first deeply puzzled and embarrassed by the
warm acceptance and thanks he received, nevertheless was ashamed to fall
back again, and, bestirring himself, did secure the appointment for his
friend. It was not very great in point of importance, but it was ideal
in point of situation; and when, a few days after, Edgar saw his name
gazzetted as Her Majesty's Consul at Spezzia, the emotions which filled
his mind were those of happiness as unmingled as often falls to the lot
of man. He was full of cares and troubles at that particular moment, and
did not see his way at all clear before him; but he suddenly felt as a
boat might feel (if a boat could feel anything) which has been lying
high and dry ashore, when at last the gentle persuasion of the sunshiny
waves reaches it, lifts, floats it off into soft, delicious certainty of
motion; or perhaps it would be more correct to say, as shipwrecked
sailors might feel when they see their cobbled boat, their one ark of
salvation, float strong and steady on the treacherous sea. This was the
little ark of Edgar's happier fortunes, and lo! at last it was afloat!
After he had written his letter to Lord Newmarch, he went down to
Tottenham's, from which he had been absent for a fortnight, to the total
neglect of Phil's lessons, and Lady Mary's lectures, and everything else
that had been important a fortnight ago. He went by railway, and they
met him at the station, celebrating his return by a friendly
demonstration. On the road by the green they met Harry, walking towards
Mrs. Sims' lodgings. He gave Edgar a very cold greeting.
"Oh! I did not know you were coming back," he said, and pursued his way,
affecting to take a different turn, as long as they were in sight.
Harry's countenance was lowering and overcast, his address scarcely
civil. He felt his interests entirely antagonistic to those of his
sister and her betrothed. The children burst into remarks upon his
bearishness as they went on.
"He was bearable at first," said Phil, "but since you have been away,
and while papa has been away, he has led us such a life, Mr. Earnshaw."
"He is always in the village--always, always in the village; and Sibby
says she hates him!" cried little Molly, who was enthusiastic for her
last new friend.
"Hush, children--don't gossip," said their mother; but she too had a
cloud upon her brow.
Then Edgar had a long conversation with Lady Mary in the conservatory,
under the palm-tree, while the children had tea. He told her of all his
plans and prospects, and of the Consulship, upon which he reckoned so
confidently, and which did not, to Lady Mary's eyes, look quite so fine
an opening as it seemed to her husband.
"Of course, then, we must give you up," she said, regretfully; "but I
think Lord Newmarch might have done something better for an old friend."
Something better! The words seemed idle words to Edgar, so well pleased
was he with his prospective appointment. Then he told her of Mr.
Thornleigh's letter, which was so much more gracious than he could have
hoped for; and then the cloud returned to Lady Mary's brow.
"I am not at all easy about Harry," she said. "Mr. Earnshaw--no, I will
call you Edgar, because I have always heard you called Edgar, and always
wanted to call you so; Edgar, then--now don't thank me, for it is quite
natural--tell me one thing. Have you any influence with your cousin?"
"The doctor?"
"No, not the doctor; if I wanted anything of him, I should ask it
myself. His sister; she is a very beautiful young woman, and, so far as
I can see, very sensible and well-behaved, and discreet--no one can say
a word against her; but if you had any influence with her, as being her
cousin----"
"Is it about Harry?" asked Edgar, anxiously.
"About Harry!--how do you know?--have you heard anything?"
"Harry has told his mother," said Edgar; "they are all in despair."
"Oh! I knew it!" cried Lady Mary. "I told Tom so, and he would not
believe me. What, has it come so far as that, that he has spoken to his
mother? Then, innocent as she looks, she must be a designing creature,
after all."
"He may not have spoken to her, though he has spoken to his mother,"
said Edgar. Was it the spell of kindred blood working in him? for he did
not like this to be said of Margaret, and instinctively attempted to
defend her.
Lady Mary shook her head.
"Do you think any man would be such a fool as to speak to his parents
before he had spoken to the woman?" she said. "One never knows how such
a boy as Harry may act, but I should not have thought that likely.
However, you have not answered my question. Do you think you have any
influence, being her cousin, over her?"
"I do not know her," said Edgar. "I have only spoken to her once."
Would this be sufficient defence for him? he wondered, or must he hear
himself again appealed to, to interfere in another case so like his own?
"That is very unfortunate," said Lady Mary, with a sigh; but, happily
for him, she there left the subject. "I cannot say that she has ever
given him any encouragement," she said presently, in a subdued tone.
Margaret had gained her point; she was acquitted of this sin, at least;
but Lady Mary pronounced the acquittal somewhat grudgingly. Perhaps,
when a young man is intent upon making a foolish marriage, it is the
best comfort to his parents and friends to be able to feel that she is
artful and designing, and has led the poor boy away.
Edgar went out next morning to see his cousins; he announced his
intention at the breakfast-table, to make sure of no encounter with poor
Harry, who was flighty and unpleasant in manner, and seemed to have some
wish to fix a quarrel upon him. Harry looked up quickly, as if about to
speak, but changed his mind, and said nothing. And Edgar went his
way--hoping the doctor might not be gone upon his round of visits, yet
hoping he might; not wishing to see Margaret, and yet wishing to see
her--in a most uncomfortable and painful state of mind. To his partial
surprise and partial relief, he met her walking along the green towards
the avenue with her little girl. It was impossible not to admire her
grace, her beautiful, half-pathetic countenance, and the gentle
maternity of the beautiful young woman never separate from the beautiful
child, who clung to her with a fondness and dependence which no
indifferent mother ever earns. She greeted Edgar with the sudden smile
which was like sunshine on her face, and held out her hand to him with
frank sweetness.
"I am very glad you have come back," she said. "It has been unfortunate
for us your being away."
"Only unfortunate for me, I think," said Edgar, "for you seem to have
made friends with my friends as much as if I had been here to help it
on. Is this Sibby? I have heard of nothing but Sibby since I came back."
"Lady Mary has been very kind," said Margaret, with, he thought, a faint
flush over her pale, pretty cheek.
"And you like the place? And Dr. Charles has got acquainted with his
patients?"
"My brother would like to tell you all that himself," said Margaret;
"but I want to speak to you of Loch Arroch, and of the old house, and
dear granny. Did you know that she was ill again?"
Margaret looked at him with her beautiful eyes full of tears. Edgar was
not for a moment unfaithful to his Gussy, but after that look I believe
he would have dared heaven and earth, and Mr. Thornleigh, rather than
interfere with anything upon which this lovely creature had set her
heart. Could it be that she had set her heart on Harry Thornleigh, he
asked himself with a groan?
"No," he said; "they write to me very seldom. When did you hear?"
"Mr. Earnshaw, I have had a letter this morning--it has shaken me very
much," said Margaret. "Will you come to the cottage with me till I tell
you? Do you remember?--but you could not remember--it was before your
time."
"What?--I may have heard of it--something which agitates you?"
"Not painfully," said Margaret, with a faltering voice and unsteady
smile; "gladly, if I could put faith in it. Jeanie had a brother that
was lost at sea, or we thought he was lost. It was his loss that made
her so--ill; and she took you for him--you are like him, Mr. Earnshaw.
Well," said Margaret, two tears dropping out of her eyes, "they have had
a letter--he is not dead, he is perhaps coming home."
"What has become of him, then?--and why did he never send word?" cried
Edgar. "How heartless, how cruel!"
Margaret laid her hand softly on his arm.
"Ah! you must not say that!" she cried. "Sailors do not think so much of
staying away a year or two. He was shipwrecked, and lost everything, and
he could not come home in his poverty upon granny. Oh! if we were all as
thoughtful as that! Mr. Earnshaw, sailors are not just to be judged like
other men."
"He might have killed his poor little sister!" cried Edgar, indignantly;
"that is a kind of conduct for which I have no sympathy. And granny, as
you call her----"
"Ah! you never learnt to call her granny," said Margaret, with
animation. "Dear granny has never been strong since her last attack--the
shock, though it was joy, was hard upon her. And she was afraid for
Jeanie; but Jeanie has stood it better than anybody could hope; and
perhaps he is there now," said Margaret, with once more the tears
falling suddenly from her eyes.
"You know him?" said Edgar.
"Oh! know him! I knew him like my own heart!" cried Margaret, a flush
of sudden colour spreading over her pale face. She did not look up, but
kept her eyes upon the ground, going softly along by Edgar's side, her
beautiful face full of emotion. "He would not write till he had gained
back again what was lost. He is coming home captain of his ship," she
said, with an indescribable soft triumph.
At that moment a weight was lifted off Edgar's mind--it was as when the
clouds suddenly break, and the sun bursts forth. He too could have
broken forth into songs or shoutings, to express his sense of release.
"I am glad that everything is ending so happily," he said, in a subdued
tone. He did not trust himself to look at her, any more than Margaret
could trust herself to look at him. When they reached the cottage, she
went in, and got her letter, and put it into his hand to read; while she
herself played with Sibby, throwing her ball for her, entering into the
child's glee with all the lightness of a joyful heart. Edgar could not
but look at her, between the lines of Jeanie's simple letter. He seemed
to himself so well able to read the story, and to understand what
Margaret's soft blush and subdued excitement of happiness meant.
And yet Harry Thornleigh was still undismissed, and hoped to win her. He
met him as he himself returned to the house. Harry was still uncivil,
and had barely acknowledged Edgar's presence at breakfast; but he
stopped him now, almost with a threatening look.
"Look here, Earnshaw," he said, "I daresay they told you what is in my
mind. I daresay they tried to set you over me as a spy. Don't you think
I'll bear it. I don't mean to be tricked out of my choice by any set of
women, and I have made my choice now."
"Do you know you are mighty uncivil?" said Edgar. "If you had once
thought of what you were saying, you would not venture upon such a word
as spy to me."
"Venture!" cried the young man. Then, calming himself, "I didn't mean
it--of course I beg your pardon. But these women are enough to drive a
man frantic; and I've made my choice, let them do what they will, and
let my father rave as much as he pleases."
"This is not a matter which I can enter into," said Edgar; "but just one
word. Does the lady know how far you have gone?--and has she made her
choice as well as you?"
Harry's face lighted up, then grew dark and pale.
"I thought so once," he said, "but now I cannot tell. She is as
changeable as--as all women are," he broke off, with a forced laugh.
"It's their way."
Edgar did not see Harry again till after dinner, and then he was
stricken with sympathy to see how ill he looked. What had happened? But
there was no time or opportunity to inquire what had happened to him.
That evening the mail brought him a letter from Robert Campbell, at
Loch Arroch Head, begging him, if he wanted to see his grandmother
alive, to come at once. She was very ill, and it was not possible that
she could live more than a day or two. He made his arrangements
instantly to go to her, starting next morning, for he was already too
late to catch the night mail. When he set out at break of day, in order
to be in time for the early train from London, he found Margaret already
at the station. She had been summoned also. He had written the night
before a hurried note to Gussy, announcing his sudden call to Loch
Arroch, but he was not aware then that he was to have companionship on
his journey. He put his cousin into the carriage, not ill-pleased to
have her company, and then, leaving many misconceptions behind him,
hurried away, to wind up in Scotland one portion of his
strangely-mingled life.
CHAPTER XIX.
Margaret.
The relations between Harry Thornleigh and Margaret had never come to
any distinct explanation. They had known each other not much more than a
fortnight, which was quite reason enough, on Margaret's side, at least,
for holding back all explanation, and discouraging rather than helping
on the too eager young lover.
During all the time of Edgar's absence, it would be useless to deny that
Harry's devotion suggested very clearly to the penniless young widow,
the poor doctor's sister, such an advancement in life as might well have
turned any woman's head. She who had nothing, who had to make a hard
light to get the ends to meet for the doctor and herself, who had for
years exercised all the shifts of genteel poverty, and who, before that,
had been trained to a homely life anything but genteel--had suddenly set
open to her the gates of that paradise of wealth, and rank, and luxury,
which is all the more ecstatic to the poor for being unknown. She, too,
might "ride in her carriage," might wear diamonds, might go to Court,
might live familiarly with the great people of the land, like Lady Mary;
she who had been bred at the Castle Farm on Loch Arroch, and had known
what it was to "supper the beasts," and milk the kye; she who had not
disdained the household work of her own little house, in the days of the
poor young Glasgow clerk whom she had married. There had been some
natural taste for elegance in the brother and sister, both handsome
young people, which had developed into gentility by reason of his
profession, and their escape from all the associations of home, where no
one could have been deceived as to their natural position. But Dr.
Charles had made no money anywhere; he had nothing but debts; though
from the moment when he had taken his beautiful sister to be his
housekeeper and companion, he had gradually risen in pretension and aim.
Their transfer to England, a step which always sounds very grand in
homely Scotch ears, had somehow dazzled the whole kith and kin. Even
Robert Campbell, at Loch Arroch Head, had been induced to draw his
cautious purse, and contribute to this new establishment. And now the
first fruits of the venture hung golden on the bough--Margaret had but
to put forth her hand and pluck them; nay, she had but to be passive,
and receive them in her lap. She had held Harry back from a premature
declaration of his sentiments, but she had done this so sweetly that
Harry had been but more and more closely enveloped in her toils; and she
had made up her mind that his passion was to be allowed to ripen, and
that finally she would accept him, and reign like a princess, and live
like Lady Mary, surrounded by all the luxuries which were sweet to her
soul.
It is not necessary, because one is born poor, that one should like the
conditions of that lowly estate, or have no taste for better things. On
the contrary, Margaret was born with a love of all that was soft, and
warm, and easy, and luxurious. She loved these things and prized them;
she felt it in her to be a great lady; her gentle mind was such that she
would have made an excellent princess, all the more sweet, gracious, and
good the less she was crossed, and the more she had her own way.
I am disposed to think, for my own part, that for every individual who
is mellowed and softened by adversity, there are at least ten in the
world whom prosperity would mollify and bring to perfection; but then
that latter process of development is more difficult to attain to.
Margaret felt that it was within her reach. She would have done nothing
unwomanly to secure her lover; nay, has it not been already said that
she had made up her mind to be doubly prudent, and to put it in no one's
power to say that she had "given him encouragement?" But with that
modest reserve, she had made up her mind to Harry's happiness and her
own. In her heart she had already consented, and regarded the bargain as
concluded. She would have made him a very sweet wife, and Harry would
have been happy. No doubt he was sufficiently a man of the world to have
felt a sharp twinge sometimes, when his wife's family was brought in
question; but he thought nothing of that in his hot love, and I believe
she would have made him so good a wife, and been so sweet to Harry, that
this drawback would have detracted very little from his happiness.
So things were going on, ripening pleasantly towards a dnouement
which could not be very far off, when that unlucky letter arrived from
Loch Arroch, touching the re-appearance of Jeanie's brother, the lost
sailor, who had been Margaret's first love. This letter upset her, poor
soul, amid all her plans and hopes. If it had not, however, unluckily
happened that the arrival of Edgar coincided with her receipt of the
letter, and that both together were followed by the expedition to Loch
Arroch, to the grandmother's deathbed, I believe the sailor's return
would only have caused a little tremulousness in Margaret's resolution,
a momentary shadow upon her sweet reception of Harry, but that nothing
more would have followed, and all would have gone well. Dear reader,
forgive me if I say all would have gone well; for, to tell the truth,
though it was so much against Edgar's interests, and though it partook
of the character of a mercenary match, and of everything that is most
repugnant to romance, I cannot help feeling a little pang of regret that
any untoward accident should have come in Margaret's way. Probably the
infusion of her good, wholesome Scotch blood, her good sense, and her
unusual beauty, would have done a great deal more good to the Thornleigh
race than a Right Honourable grandfather; and she would have made such a
lovely great lady, and would have enjoyed her greatness so much (far
more than any Lady Mary ever could enjoy it), and been so good a wife,
and so sweet a mother! That she should give up all this at the first
returning thrill of an old love, is perhaps very much more poetical and
elevating; but I who write am not so young or so romantic as I once was,
and I confess that I look upon the interruption of the story, which was
so clearly tending towards another end, with a great deal of regret.
Even Edgar, when he found her ready to accompany him to Scotland, felt a
certain excitement which was not unmingled with regret. He felt by
instinct that Harry's hopes were over, and this thought gave him a great
sense of personal comfort and relief. It chased away the difficulties
out of his own way; but at the same time he could not but ask himself
what was the inducement for which she was throwing away all the
advantages that Harry Thornleigh could give her?--the love of a rough
sailor, captain at the best, of a merchant-ship, who had been so little
thoughtful of his friends as to leave them three or four years without
any news of him, and who probably loved her no longer, if he had ever
loved her. It was all to Edgar's advantage that she should come away at
this crisis, and what was it to him if she threw her life away for a
fancy? But Edgar had never been in the way of thinking of himself only,
and the mingled feelings in his mind found utterance in a vague warning.
He did not know either her or her circumstances well enough to venture
upon more plain speech.
"Do you think you are right to leave your brother just at this moment,
when he is settling down?" Edgar said.
A little cloud rose upon Margaret's face. Did not she know better than
anyone how foolish it was?
"Ah!" she said, "but if granny is dying, as they say, I must see her,"
and the ready tears sprung to her eyes.
Edgar was so touched by her looks, that, though it was dreadfully
against his own interest, he tried again.
"Of all the women in the world," he said, "she is the most considerate,
the most understanding. It is a long and an expensive journey, and your
life, she would say, is of more importance than her dying."
He ventured to look her in the face as he spoke these words, and
Margaret grew crimson under his gaze.
"I do not see how it can affect my life, if I am away for a week or
two," she said lightly, yet with a tone which showed him that her mind
was made up. Perhaps he thought she was prudently retiring to be quit of
Harry--perhaps withdrawing from a position which became untenable; or
why might it not be pure gratitude and love to the only mother she had
known in her life? Anyhow, whatever might be the reason, there was no
more to be said.
I will not attempt to describe the feelings of Harry Thornleigh, when he
found that Margaret had gone away, and gone with Edgar. He came back to
Lady Mary raving and white with rage, to pour out upon her the first
outburst of his passion.
"The villain!--the traitor!--the low, sneaking rascal!" Harry cried,
foaming. "He has made a catspaw of Gussy and a fool of me. We might have
known it was all a lie and pretence. He has carried her off under our
very eyes."
Even Lady Mary was staggered, strong as was her faith in Edgar; and
Harry left her doubtful, and not knowing what to make of so strange a
story, and rushed up to town, to carry war and devastation into his
innocent family. He went to Berkeley Square, and flung open the door of
the morning-room, where they were all seated, and threw himself among
them like a thunderbolt. Gussy had received Edgar's note a little while
before, and she had been musing over it, pensive, not quite happy, not
quite pleased, and saying to herself how very wrong and how very foolish
she was. Of course, if his old mother were dying, he must go to her--he
had no choice; but Gussy, after waiting so long for him, and proving
herself so exceptionally faithful, felt that she had a certain right to
Edgar's company now, and to have him by her side, all the more that Lady
Augusta had protested that she did not think it would be right to permit
it in the unsettled state of his circumstances, and of the engagement
generally. To have your mother hesitate, and declare that she does not
think she ought to admit him, and then to have your lover abstain from
asking admission, is hard upon a girl. Lord Granton (though, to be sure,
he was a very young man, with nothing to do) was dangling constantly
about little Mary; and Gussy felt that Edgar's many businesses, which
led him here, and led him there, altogether out of her way, were
inopportune, to say the least.
Harry assailed his mother fiercely, without breath or pause. He accused
her of sending "that fellow" down to Tottenham's, on purpose to
interfere with him, to be a spy upon him, to ruin all his hopes.
"I have seen a change since ever he came!" he cried wildly. "If it is
your doing, mother, I will never forgive you! Don't think I am the sort
of man to take such a thing without resenting it! When you see me going
to the devil, you will know whose fault it is. Her fault?--no, she has
been deceived. You have sent that fellow down upon her with his devilish
tongue, to persuade her and delude her. It is he that has taken her
away. No, it is not her fault, it is your fault!" cried Harry. "I should
have grown a good man. I should have given up everything she did not
like; and now you have made up some devilish conspiracy, and you have
taken her away."
"Harry, do you remember that you are talking to your mother?" cried Lady
Augusta, with trembling lips.
"My mother! A mother helps one, loves one, makes things easy for one!"
he cried. "That's the ordinary view. Excuses you, and does her best for
you, not her worst; when you take up your rle as you ought, I'll take
mine. But since you've set your mind on thwarting, deceiving, injuring
me in my best hopes!" cried Harry, white with rage, "stealing from me
the blessing I had almost got, that I would have got, had you stopped
your d----d interference!"
His voice broke here; he had not meant to go so far. As a gentleman at
least, he ought, he knew, to use no oath to ladies; but poor Harry was
beside himself. He stopped short, half-appalled, half-satisfied that he
had spoken his mind.
"Harry, how dare you?" cried Gussy, facing him. "Do you not see how you
are wounding mamma? Has there ever been a time when she has not stood up
for you? And now because she is grieved to think that you are going to
ruin yourself, unwilling that you should throw yourself away----"
"All this comes beautifully from you!" cried Harry, with a sneer--"you
who have never thought of throwing yourself away. But I am sorry for
you, Gussy. I don't triumph over you. You have been taken in, poor girl,
the worst of the two!"
Gussy was shaken for the moment by his change of tone, by his sudden
compassion. She felt as if the ground had suddenly been cut from under
her feet, and a dizzy sense of insecurity came over her. She looked at
her mother, half frightened, not knowing what to think or say.
"When you have come to your senses, Harry, you will perhaps tell us the
meaning of this!" cried Lady Augusta. "Girls, it is time for you to keep
your appointment with Elise. Ada will go with you to-day, for I don't
feel quite well. If you have anything to say to me another time," she
added with dignity, addressing her son, "especially if it is of a
violent description, you will be good enough to wait until Mary has left
the room. I do not choose that she should carry away into her new family
the recollection of brutality at home."
Lady Augusta's grand manner was known in the household. Poor Gussy,
though sad and sorry enough, found it difficult to keep from a laugh in
which there would have been but little mirth. But Harry's perceptions
were not so lively, or his sense of the ridiculous so strong. He was
somehow cowed by the idea of his little sister carrying a recollection
of brutality into so new and splendid a connection as the Marquis of
Hauteville's magnificent family.
"Oh, bosh!" he said; but it was almost under his breath. And then he
told them of Edgar's departure from Tottenham's, and of the discovery he
had made that Margaret had gone too. "You set him on, I suppose, to
cross me," said Harry; "because I let you know there was one woman in
the world I could fancy--therefore you set him on to take her from me."
"Oh! Harry, how can you say so? I set him on!" cried Lady Augusta.
"What you are telling me is all foolishness. You are both of you
frightening yourselves about nothing. If there is anyone dying, and they
were sent for, there is no harm in two cousins travelling together.
Harry, did this lady--know what your feelings were?"
"I suppose," said Harry, after a moment's hesitation, "women are not
such fools but that they must know."
"Then you had said nothing to her?" said his mother, pursuing the
subject. Perhaps she permitted a little gleam of triumph to appear in
her eye, for he jumped up instantly, more excited than ever.
"I am going after them," he said. "I don't mean to be turned off without
an answer. Whether she has me or not, she shall decide herself; it shall
not be done by any plot against us. This is what you drive me to, with
your underhand ways. I shall not wait a day longer. I'll go down to
Scotland to-night."
"Do not say anything to him, Gussy," cried Lady Augusta. "Let him accuse
his mother and sister of underhand ways, if he likes. And you can go,
sir, if you please, on your mad errand. If the woman is a lady, she will
know what to think of your suspicions. If she is not a lady----"
"What then?" he cried, in high wrath.
"Probably she will accept you," said Lady Augusta, pale and grand. "I do
not understand the modes of action of such people. You will have had
your way, in any case--and then you will hear what your father has to
say."
Harry flung out of the house furious. He was very unhappy, poor fellow!
He was chilled and cast down, in spite of himself, by his mother's
speech. Why should he follow Margaret as if he suspected her? What right
had he to interfere with her actions? If he went he might be supposed to
insult her--if he stayed he should lose her. What was he to do? Poor
Harry!--if Dr. Murray had not been so obnoxious to him, I think he would
have confided his troubles to, and asked advice from, Margaret's
brother; but Dr. Charles had replied to his inquiry with a confidential
look, and a smile which made him furious.
"She will be back in a week or two. I am not afraid just now, in present
circumstances, that she will forsake me for long," he had said. "We
shall soon have her back again."
We!--whom did the fellow mean by we? Harry resolved on the spot that, if
she ever became his wife, she should give up this cad of a brother.
Which I am glad to say, for her credit, was a thing that Margaret would
never have consented to do.
But the Thornleigh family was not happy that day. Gussy, though she had
never doubted Edgar before, yet felt cold shivers of uncertainty shoot
through her heart now. Margaret was beautiful, and almost all women
exaggerate the power of beauty. They give up instinctively before it,
with a conviction, which is so general as to be part of the feminine
creed, that no man can resist that magic power. No doubt Edgar meant to
do what was best; no doubt, she said to herself, that in his heart he
was true--but with a lovely woman there, so lovely, and with claims upon
his kindness, who could wonder if he went astray? And this poor little
scanty note which advised Gussy of his necessary absence, said not a
word about Margaret. She read it over and over again, finding it each
time less satisfactory. At the first reading it had been disappointing,
but nothing more; now it seemed cold, unnecessarily hurried, careless.
She contrasted it with a former one he had written to her, and it seemed
to her that no impartial eye could mistake the difference. She
sympathized with her brother, and yet she envied him, for he was a man,
and could go and discover what was false and what was true; but she had
to wait and be patient, and betray to no one what was the matter, though
her heart might be breaking--yes, though her heart might be breaking!
For, after all, might it not be said that it was she who made the first
overtures to Edgar, not he to her? It might be pity only for her long
constancy that had drawn him to her, and the sight of this woman's
beautiful face might have melted away that false sentiment. When the
thoughts once fall to such a catastrophe as this, the velocity with
which they go (does not science say so?) doubles moment by moment. I
cannot tell you to what a pitch of misery Gussy had worn herself before
the end of that long--terribly long, silent, and hopeless Spring day.
CHAPTER XX.
Loch Arroch once more.
Edgar and Margaret (accompanied, as she always was, by her child)
arrived at Loch Arroch early on the morning of the second day. They were
compelled to stay in Glasgow all night--she with friends she had there,
he in an inn. It was a rainy, melancholy morning when they got into the
steamer, and crossed the broad Clyde, and wound upward among the hills
to Loch Arroch Head, where Robert Campbell, with an aspect of formal
solemnity, waited with his gig to drive them to the farm.
"You're in time--oh ay, you're in time; but little more," he said, and
went on at intervals in a somewhat solemn monologue, as they drove down
the side of the grey and misty loch, under dripping cloaks and
umbrellas. "She's been failing ever since the new year," he said. "It's
not to be wondered at, at her age; neither should we sorrow, as them
that are without hope. She's lived a good and useful life, and them that
she brought into the world have been enabled to smooth her path out of
it. We've nothing to murmur at; she'll be real glad to see you
both--you, Marg'ret, and you, Mr. Edgar. Often does she speak of you.
It's a blessing of Providence that her life has been spared since the
time last Autumn when we all thought she was going. She's had a real
comfortable evening time, with the light in it, poor old granny, as she
had a right to, if any erring mortal can be said to have a right. And
now, there's Willie restored, that was thought to be dead and gone."
"Has Willie come back?" asked Margaret hastily.
"He's expected," said Robert Campbell, with a curious dryness, changing
the lugubrious tone of his voice; "and I hope he'll turn out an altered
man; but it's no everyone going down to the sea in ships that sees the
wisdom o' the Lord in the great waters, as might be hoped."
The rain blew in their faces, the mists came down over the great
mountain range which separates Loch Arroch from Loch Long, and the
Castle Farm lay damp and lonely in its little patch of green, with the
low ruins on the other side of the house shining brown against the cut
fields and the slaty blueness of the loch. It was not a cheerful
prospect, nor was it cheerful to enter the house itself, full of the
mournful bustle and suppressed excitement of a dying--that high
ceremonial, to which, in respect, or reverence, or dire curiosity, or
acquisitiveness, more dreadful still, so many spectators throng in the
condition of life to which all Mrs. Murray's household belonged.
In the sitting-room there were several people seated. Mrs. MacColl, the
youngest daughter, in her mother's chair, with her handkerchief to her
eyes, and Mrs. Campbell opposite, telling her sister, who had but lately
arrived, the details of the illness; Jeanie MacColl, who had come with
her mother, sat listlessly at the window, looking out, depressed by the
day and the atmosphere, and the low hum of talk, and all the dismal
accessories of the scene. James Murray's wife, a hard-featured, homely
person, plain in attire, and less refined in manner than any of the
others, went and came between the parlour and the kitchen.
"They maun a' have their dinner," she said to Bell, "notwithstanding
that there's a dying person in the house;" and with the corners of her
mouth drawn down, and an occasional sigh making itself audible, she laid
the cloth, and prepared the table.
Now and then a sound in the room above would make them pause and
listen--for, indeed, at any moment they might all be called to witness
the exit of the departing soul. Bell's steps in the kitchen, which were
unsubduable in point of sound, ran through all the more gentle stir of
this melancholy assembly. Bell was crying over her work, pausing now and
then to go into a corner, and wipe the tears from her cheeks; but she
could not make her footsteps light, or diminish the heaviness of her
shoes.
There was a little additional bustle when the strangers arrived, and
Margaret and her child, who were wrapped up in cloaks and shawls, were
taken into the kitchen to have their wraps taken off, and to be warmed
and comforted. Edgar gave his own dripping coat to Bell, and stole
upstairs out of "the family," in which he was not much at home. Little
Jeanie had just left her grandmother's room on some necessary errand,
when he appeared at the top of the stair. She gave a low cry, and the
little tray she was carrying trembled in her hands. Her eyes were large
with watching, and her cheeks pale, and the sudden sight of him was
almost more than the poor little heart could bear; but, after a moment's
silence, Jeanie, with an effort, recovered that command of herself which
is indispensable to women.
"Oh! but she'll be glad--glad to see you!" she cried--"it's you she's
aye cried for night and day."
Edgar stood still and held her hand, looking into the soft little face,
in which he saw only a tender sorrow, not harsh or despairing, but deep
and quiet.
"Before even I speak of her," he said, "my dear little Jeanie, let me
say how happy I am to hear about your brother--he is safe after all."
Jeanie's countenance was moved, like the loch under the wind. Her great
eyes, diluted with sorrow, swelled full; a pathetic smile came upon her
lips.
"He was dead, and is alive again," she said softly; "he was lost and is
found."
"And now you will not be alone, whatever happens," said Edgar.
I don't know what mixture of poignant pain came over the grateful gleam
in little Jeanie's face. She drew her hand from him, and hastened
downstairs. "What does it matter to him, what does it matter to anyone,
how lonely I am?" was the thought that went through her simple heart.
Only one creature in the world had ever cared, chiefly, above everything
else, for Jeanie's happiness, and that one was dying, not to be detained
by any anxious hold. Jeanie, simple as she was, knew better than to
believe that anything her brother could give her would make up for what
she was about to lose.
Edgar went into the sick-room reverently, as if he had been going into a
holy place. Mrs. Murray lay propped up with pillows on the bed. For the
first moment it seemed to him that the summons which brought him there
must have been altogether uncalled for and foolish. The old woman's eyes
were as bright and soft as Jeanie's; the pale faint pink of a Winter
rose lingered in her old cheeks; her face seemed smoothed out of many of
the wrinkles which he used to know; and expanded into a calm and
largeness of peace which filled him with awe. Was it that all mortal
anxieties, all fears and questions of the lingering day were over? By
the bedside, in her own chair, sat the minister of the parish, an old
man, older than herself, who had known her all her life. He had been
reading to her, with a voice more tremulous than her own; and the two
old people had been talking quietly and slowly of the place to which
they were so near. I have no doubt that in the pulpit old Mr. Campbell,
like other divines, talked of golden streets, and harps and crowns, in
the New Jerusalem above. But here there was little room for such
anticipations. A certain wistfulness was in their old eyes, for the
veil before them was still impenetrable, though they were so near it;
but they were not excited.
"You're sure of finding Him," the old man was saying; "and where He is,
there shall His people be."
"Ay," said Mrs. Murray. "And, oh! it's strange lying here, no sure
sometimes if it's me or no; no sure which me it is--an auld woman or a
young woman; and then to think that a moment will make a' clear."
This was the conversation that Edgar interrupted. She held out her
withered hand to him with a glow of joy that lighted up her face.
"My son," she said. There was something in the words that seemed to
fill the room, Edgar thought, with an indescribable warmth and fulness
of meaning, yet with that strange uncertainty which belongs to the last
stage of life. He felt that she might be identifying him, unawares, with
some lost son of thirty years ago, not forgetting his own individuality,
yet mingling the two in one image. "This is the one I told you of," she
said, turning to her old friend.
"He is like his mother," said the old man dreamily, putting out a hand
of silent welcome.
They might have been two spirits talking over him, Edgar felt, as he
stood, young, anxious, careful, and troubled, between the two who were
lingering so near the calm echoes of the eternal sea.
"You've come soon, soon, my bonnie man," said Mrs. Murray, holding his
hand between hers; "and, oh, but I'm glad to see you! Maybe it's but a
fancy, and maybe it's sinful vanity, but, minister, when I look at him,
he minds me o' mysel'. Ye'll say it's vain--the like of him, a comely
young man, and me; but it's no in the outward appearance. I've had much,
much to do in my generation," she said, slowly looking at him, with a
smile in her eyes. "And, Edgar, my bonnie lad, I'm thinking, so will
you----"
"Don't think of me," he said; "but tell me how you are. You are not
looking ill, my dear old mother. You will be well again before I go."
"Oh! ay, I'll be well again," she said. "I'm no ill--I'm only slipping
away; but I would like to say out my say. The minister has his ain way
in the pulpit," she went on, with a smile of soft humour, and with a
slowness and softness of utterance which looked like the very perfection
of art to cover her weakness; "and so may I on my deathbed, my bonnie
man. As I was saying, I've had much, much to do in my generation,
Edgar--and so will you."
She smoothed his hand between her own, caressing it, and looking at him
always with a smile.
"And you may say it's been for little, little enough," she went on. "Ah!
when my bairns were bairns, how muckle I thought of them! I toiled, and
I toiled, and rose up early and lay down late, aye thinking they must
come to mair than common folk. It was vanity, minister, vanity; I ken
that weel. You need not shake your head. God be praised, it's no a' in
a moment you find out the like o' that. But I'm telling you, Edgar, to
strengthen your heart. They're just decent men and decent women, nae
mair--and I've great, great reason to be thankful; and it's you, my
bonnie man, the seed that fell by the wayside--none o' my training, none
o' my nourishing---- Eh! how the Lord maun smile at us whiles," she
added, slowly, one lingering tear running over her eyelid, "and a' our
vain hopes!--no laugh. He's ower tender for that."
"Or weep, rather," said Edgar, penetrated by sympathetic understanding
of the long-concealed, half-fantastic pang of wounded love and pride,
which all these years had wrung silently the high heart now so near
being quieted for ever. She could smile now at her own expectations and
vanities--but what pathos was in the smile!
"We must not put emotions like our own into His mind that's over all,"
said the old minister. "Smiling or weeping's no for Him."
"Eh, but I canna see that," said the old woman. "Would He be kinder down
yonder by the Sea of Tiberias than He is up there in His ain house? It's
at hame that the gentle heart's aye kindest, minister. Mony a day I've
wondered if it mightna be just like our own loch, that Sea of
Galilee--the hills about, and the white towns, as it might be Loch
Arroch Head (though it's more grey than white), and the fishing-cobbles.
But I'm wandering--I'm wandering. Edgar, my bonnie man, you're tired
and hungry; go down the stair and get a rest, and something to eat."
Little though Edgar was disposed to resume the strange relationship
which linked him to the little party of homely people in the farm
parlour, with whom he felt so little sympathy, he had no alternative but
to obey. The early dinner was spread when he got downstairs, and a large
gathering of the family assembled round the table. All difference of
breeding and position disappear, we are fond of saying, in a common
feeling--a touch of nature makes the whole world kin; but Edgar felt, I
am afraid, more like the unhappy parson at tithing time, in Cowper's
verses, than any less prosaic hero. With whimsical misery he felt the
trouble of being too fine for his company--he, the least fine of mortal
men.
Margaret, upon whom his eye lingered almost lovingly, as she appeared
among the rest, a lily among briers, was not ill at ease as he was;
perhaps, to tell the truth, she was more entirely at her ease than when
she had sat, on her guard, and very anxious not to "commit any
solecism," at Lady Mary's table. To commit a solecism was the bugbear
which had always been held before her by her brother, whose fears on
this account made his existence miserable. But here Margaret felt the
sweetness of her own superiority, without being shocked by the
homeliness of the others. She had made a hurried visit to her
grandmother, and had cried, and had been comforted, and was now smiling
softly at them all, full of content and pleasant anticipations. Jeanie,
who never left her grandmother, was not present; the Campbells, the
MacColls and the Murrays formed the company, speaking low, yet eating
heartily, who thus waited for the death which was about to take place
above.
"I never thought you would have got away so easy," said Mrs. Campbell.
"I would scarcely let your uncle write. 'How can she leave Charles, and
come such a far gait, maybe just for an hour or two?' I said. But here
you are, Margaret, notwithstanding a' my doubts. Ye'll have plenty of
servant-maids, and much confidence in them, that ye can leave so easy
from a new place?"
"We are not in our house yet, and we have no servant," said Margaret.
"Charles is in lodgings, with a very decent person. It was easy enough
to get away."
"Lodgings are awful expensive," said Mrs. MacColl. "I'm sure when we
were in lodgings, Mr. MacColl and me, the Exhibition year, I dare not
tell what it cost. You should get into a house of your ain--a doctor is
never anything thought of without a house of his ain."
"I hope you found the information correct?" said Robert Campbell,
addressing Edgar. "The woman at Dalmally minded the couple fine. It was
the same name as your auld friend yonder," and he pointed with his thumb
over his left shoulder, to denote England, or Arden, or the world in
general. "One of the family, perhaps?"
"Yes."
"Oh! I want to spy into no secrets. Things of this kind are often
turning up. They may say what they like against our Scotch law, but it
prevents villainy now and then, that's certain. Were you interested for
the man or the leddy, if it's a fair question? For it all depends upon
that."
"In neither of them," said Edgar. "It was a third party, whom they had
injured, that I cared for. When is--Jeanie's brother--expected back?"
"He may come either the day or the morn," said Mrs. MacColl. "I wish he
was here, for mother's very weak. Do you not think she's weaker since
the morning? I thought her looking just wonderful when I saw her first,
but at twelve o'clock--What did the doctor think?"
"He canna tell more than the rest of us," said James Murray's wife.
"She's going fast--that's all that can be said."
And then there was a little pause, and everybody looked sad for the
moment. They almost brightened up, however, when some hasty steps were
heard overhead, and suspended their knives and forks and listened.
Excitement of this kind is hard to support for a stretch. Nature longs
for a crisis, even when the crisis is more terrible than their mild
sorrow could be supposed to be. When it appeared, however, that nothing
was about to happen, and the steps overhead grew still again, they all
calmed down and resumed their dinner, which was an alleviation of the
tedium.
"She's made a' the necessary dispositions?" said James Murray's wife,
interrogatively. "My man is coming by the next steamer. No that there
can be very muckle to divide."
"Nothing but auld napery, and the auld sticks of furniture. It will
bring very little--and the cow," said Robert Campbell. "Jean likes the
beast, so we were thinking of making an offer for the cow."
"You'll no think I'm wanting to get anything by my mother's death," said
Mrs. MacColl; "for I'm real well off, the Lord be thanked! with a good
man, and the bairns doing well; I would rather give than take, if there
was any occasion; but Robert has aye had a great notion of the old clock
on the stairs. There's a song about it that one of the lassies sings. I
would like that, to keep the bairns in mind o' their granny. She's been
a kind granny to them all."
She put her handkerchief to her eyes, and Margaret and Jeanie MacColl
cried a little. The rest of the company shook their heads, and assented
in different tones.
"Real good and kind, good and kind to everybody! Ower guid to some that
little deserved it!" was the general burden, for family could not but
have its subdued fling at family, even in this moment of melancholy
accord.
"You are forgetting," said Edgar, "the only one of the family who is not
provided for. What my grandmother leaves should be for little Jeanie.
She is the only helpless one of all."
At this there was a little murmur round the table, of general
objection.
"Jeanie has had far more than her share already," said one.
"She's no more to granny than all the rest of the bairns," cried
another.
Robert Campbell, the only other man present, raised his voice, and made
himself heard.
"Jeanie will never want," he said; "here's her brother come back, no
very much of a man, but still with heart enough in him to keep her from
wanting. Willie's but a roving lad, but the very rovingness of him is
good for this, that he'll not marry; and Jeanie will have a support,
till she gets a man, which is aye on the cards for such a bonnie lass."
This was said with more than one meaning. Edgar saw Margaret's eyelashes
flutter on her cheek, and she moved a little uneasily, as though unable
to restrain all evidence of a painful emotion. Just at this moment,
however, a shadow darkened the window. Margaret, more keenly on the
watch than anyone, lifted her eyes suddenly, and, rising to her feet,
uttered a low cry. A young man in sailor's dress came into the room,
with a somewhat noisy greeting.
"What, all of you here! What luck!" he cried. "But where's granny?"
He had to be hushed into silence, and to have all the circumstances
explained to him; while Jeanie MacColl, half-reluctant to go, was sent
upstairs to call her cousin and namesake, and to take her place as nurse
for the moment. Edgar called her back softly, and offered himself for
this duty. He cast a glance at the returned prodigal as he left the
room, the brother for whom Jeanie had taken him, and whom everybody had
acknowledged his great likeness to. Edgar looked at him with mingled
amusement and curiosity, to see what he himself must look like. Perhaps
Willie had not improved during his adventurous cruise. Edgar did not
think much of himself as reflected in his image; and how glad he was to
escape from his uncle and his aunt, and their family talk, to the
stillness and loftier atmosphere of the death-chamber upstairs!
CHAPTER XXI.
The End of a Drama.
Mrs. Murray lived two days longer. They were weary days to Edgar. It
seems hard to grudge another hour, another moment to the dying, but how
hard are those last lingerings, when hope is over, when all work is
suspended, and a whole little world visibly standing still, till the
lingerer can make up his mind to go! The sufferer herself was too human,
too deeply experienced in life, not to feel the heavy interval as much
as they did. "I'm grieved, grieved," she said, with that emphatic
repetition which the Scotch peasant uses in common with all naturally
eloquent races, "to keep you waiting, bairns." Sometimes she said this
with a wistful smile, as claiming their indulgence; sometimes with a
pang of consciousness that they were as weary as she was. She had kissed
and blessed her prodigal returned, and owned to herself with a groan,
which was, however, breathed into her own breast, and of which no one
was the wiser, that Willie, too, was "no more than common folk."
I cannot explain more than the words themselves do how this high soul in
homely guise felt the pang of her oft-repeated disappointment. Children
and grandchildren, she had fed them not with common food, the bread
earned with ordinary labours, but with her blood, like the pelican; with
the toil of man and woman, of ploughman and hero, all mingled into one.
High heart, heroic in her weakness as in her strength! They had turned
out but "common folk," and, at each successive failure, that pang had
gone through and through her which common folk could not comprehend. She
looked at Willie the last, with a mingled pleasure and anguish in her
dying mind--I say pleasure, and not joy, for the signs of his face were
not such as to give that last benediction of happiness. Nature was glad
in her to see the boy back whom she had long believed at the bottom of
the sea; but her dying eyes looked at him wistfully, trying to penetrate
his heart, and reach its excuses.
"You should have written, to ease our minds," she said gently.
"How was I to know you would take it to heart so? Many a man has stayed
away longer, and no harm come of it," cried Willie, self-defending.
The old woman put her hand upon his bended head, as he sat by her
bedside, half sullen, half sorry. She stroked his thick curling locks
softly, saying nothing for a few long silent moments. She did not blame
him further, nor justify him, but simply was silent. Then she said,
"You will take care of your sister, Willie, as I have taken care of her?
She has suffered a great deal for you."
"But oh!" cried Jeanie, when they were alone together--kneeling by the
bedside, with her face upon her grandmother's hand, "you never called
him but Willie--you never spoke to him soft and kind, as you used to
do."
"Was I no kind?" said the dying woman, with a mingled smile and sigh;
but she kept "My bonnie man!" her one expression of homely fondness, for
Edgar's ear alone.
They had more than one long conversation before her end came. Edgar was
always glad to volunteer to relieve the watchers in her room, feeling
infinitely more at home there than with the others below. On the night
before her death, she told him of the arrangements she had made.
"You gave me your fortune, Edgar, ower rashly, my bonnie man. Your deed
was so worded, they tell me, that I might have willed your siller away
from you, had I no been an honest woman."
"And so I meant," said Edgar, though he was not very clear that at the
time he had any meaning at all. "And there is Jeanie----"
"You will not take Jeanie upon you," said the old woman--"I charge ye
not to do it. The best thing her brother can have to steady him and keep
him right, is the thought of Jeanie on his hands--Jeanie to look for him
when he comes home. You'll mind what I say. Meddling with nature is aye
wrong; I've done it in my day, and I've repented. To make a' sure, I've
left a will, Edgar, giving everything to you--everything. What is it? My
auld napery, and the auld, auld remains of my mother's--most of it her
spinning and mine. Give it to your aunts, Edgar, for they'll think it
their due; but keep a something--what are the auld rags worth to
you?--keep a little piece to mind me by--a bit of the fine auld
damask--so proud as I was of it once! I've nae rings nor bonny-dies,
like a grand leddy, to keep you in mind of me."
She spoke so slowly that these words took her a long time to say, and
they were interrupted by frequent pauses; but her voice had not the
painful labouring which is so common at such a moment; it was very low,
but still sweet and clear. Then she put out her hand, still so fine, and
soft, and shapely, though the nervous force had gone out of it, upon
Edgar's arm.
"I'm going where I'll hear nothing of you, maybe, for long," she said.
"I would like to take all the news with me--for there's them to meet
yonder that will want to hear. There's something in your eye, my bonnie
man, that makes me glad. You're no just as you were--there's more light
and more life. Edgar, you're seeing your way?"
Then, in the silence of the night, he told her all his tale. The
curtains had been drawn aside, that she might see the moon shining over
the hills. The clearest still night had succeeded many days of rain; the
soft "hus-sh" of the loch lapping upon the beach was the only sound that
broke the great calm. He sat between her and that vision of blue sky and
silvered hill which was framed in by the window; by his side a little
table, with a candle on it, which lighted one side of his face; behind
him the shadowy dimness of the death-chamber; above him that gleam of
midnight sky. He saw nothing but her face; she looked wistfully,
fondly, as on a picture she might never see more, upon all the
circumstances of this scene. He told her everything--more than he ever
told to mortal after her--how he had been able to serve Clare, and how
she had been saved from humiliation and shame; how he had met Gussy, and
found her faithful; and how he was happy at the present moment, already
loved and trusted, but happier still in the life that lay before him,
and the woman who was to share it. She listened to every word with
minute attention, following him with little exclamations, and all the
interest of youth.
"And oh! now I'm glad!" cried the old woman, making feeble efforts,
which wasted almost all the little breath left to her, to draw something
from under her pillow--"I'm glad I have something that I never would
part with. You'll take her this, Edgar--you'll give her my blessing.
Tell her my man brought me this when I was a bride. It's marked out mony
a weary hour and mony a light one; it's marked the time of births and of
deaths. When my John died, my man, it stoppit at the moment, and it was
long, long or I had the heart to wind it again and set it going. It's
worn now, like me; but you'll bid her keep it, Edgar, my bonnie man!
You'll give her my blessing, and you'll bid her to keep it, for your old
mother's sake."
Trembling, she put into his hand an old watch, which he had often seen,
but never before so near. It was large and heavy, in an old case of
coppery gold, half hid under partially-effaced enamel, wanting
everything that a modern watch should have, but precious as an antiquity
and work of art.
"A trumpery thing that cost five pounds would please them better," she
said. "It's nae value, but it's old, old, and came to John from a
far-off forbear. You'll give it to her with my blessing. Ay, blessings
on her!--blessings on her sweet face!--for sweet it's bound to be; and
blessings on her wise heart, that's judged weel! eh, but I'm glad to
have one thing to send her. And, Edgar, now I've said all my say, turn
me a little, that I may see the moon. Heaven's but a step on such a
bonnie night. If I'm away before the morning, you'll shed nae tear, but
praise the Lord the going's done. No, dinna leave it; take it away. Put
it into your breast-pocket, where you canna lose it. And now say
fare-ye-weel to your old mother, my bonnie man."
These were the last words she said to him alone. When some one came to
relieve him, Edgar went out with a full heart into the silvery night.
Not a sound of humanity broke the still air, which yet had in it a
sharpness of the spring frosts. The loch rose and fell upon its pebbles,
as if it hushed its own very waves in sorrow. The moon shone as if with
a purpose--as if holding her lovely lamp to light some beloved wayfarer
up the shining slope.
"Heaven's but a step on such a night," he said to himself, with tears of
which his manhood was not ashamed. And so the moon lighted the traveller
home.
With the very next morning the distractions of common earth returned.
Behind the closed shutters, the women began to examine the old napery,
and the men to calculate what the furniture, the cow, the cocks and hens
would bring. James Murray valued it all, pencil and notebook in hand.
Nothing would have induced the family to show so little respect as to
shorten the six or seven days' interval before the funeral, but it was a
very tedious interval for them all. Mrs. Campbell drove off with her
husband to her own house on the second day, and James Murray returned to
Greenock; but the MacColls stayed, and Margaret, and made their "blacks"
in the darkened room below, and spoke under their breath, and wearied
for the funeral day which should release them.
Margaret, perhaps, was the one on whom this interval fell most lightly;
but yet Margaret had her private sorrows, less easy to bear than the
natural grief which justified her tears. The sailor Willie paid but
little attention to her beauty and her pathetic looks. He was full of
plans about his little sister, about taking her with him on his next
voyage, to strengthen her and "divert" her; and poor Margaret, whose
heart had gone out of her breast at first sight of him, as it had done
in her early girlhood, felt her heart sicken with the neglect, yet could
not believe in it. She could not believe in his indifference, in his
want of sympathy with those feelings which had outlived so many other
things in her mind. She went to Edgar a few days after their
grandmother's death with a letter in her hand. She went to him for
advice, and I cannot tell what it was she wished him to advise her. She
did not know herself; she wanted to do two things, and she could but
with difficulty and at a risk to herself do one.
"This is a letter I have got from Mr. Thornleigh," she said, with
downcast looks. "Oh! Cousin Edgar, my heart is breaking! Will you tell
me what to do?"
Harry's letter was hot and desperate, as was his mind. He implored her,
with abject entreaties, to marry him, not to cast him off; to remember
that for a time she had smiled upon him, or seemed to smile upon him,
and not to listen now to what anyone might say who should seek to
prejudice her against him. "What does my family matter when I adore
you?" cried poor Harry, unwittingly betraying himself. And he begged her
to send him one word, only one word--permission to come down and speak
for himself. Edgar felt, as he read this piteous epistle, like the wolf
into whose fangs a lamb had thrust its unsuspecting head.
"How can I advise you how to answer?" he said, giving her back the
letter, glad to get it out of his hands. "You must answer according to
what is in your heart."
Upon this Margaret wept, wringing her lily hands.
"Mr. Edgar," she said, "you cannot think that I am not moved by such a
letter. Oh! I'm not mercenary, I don't think I am mercenary! but to have
all this put at my feet, to feel that it would be for Charles's good
and for Sibby's good, if I could make up my mind!"
Here she stopped, and cast a glance back at the house again. Edgar had
been taking a melancholy walk along the side of the loch, where she had
joined him. Her heart was wrung by a private conflict, which she could
not put into words, but which he divined. He felt sure of it, from all
he had seen and heard since they came, as well as from the impression
conveyed to his mind the moment she had named the sailor Willie's name.
I do not know why it should be humbling for a woman to love without
return, when it is not humbling for a man; but it is certain that for
nothing in the world would Margaret have breathed the cause of her
lingering unwillingness to do anything which should separate her from
Willie; and that Edgar felt hot and ashamed for her, and turned away his
eyes, that she might not see any insight in them. At the same time,
however, the question had another side for him, and involved his own
fortunes. He tried to dismiss this thought altogether out of his mind,
but it was hard to do so. Had she loved Harry Thornleigh, Edgar would
have felt himself all the more pledged to impartiality, because this
union would seriously endanger his own; but to help to ruin himself by
encouraging a mercenary marriage, this would be hard indeed!
"Are you sure that you would get so many advantages?--to Charles and to
Sibby?" he cried, with a coldness impossible to conceal.
She looked at him startled, the tears arrested in her blue eyes. She
had never doubted upon this point. Could she make up her mind to marry
Harry, every external advantage that heart could desire she felt would
be secured. This first doubt filled her with dismay.
"Would I no?" she cried faltering. "He is a rich man's heir, Lady Mary's
nephew--a rich gentleman. Oh! Cousin Edgar, what will you think of me? I
have always been poor, and Charles is poor--how can I put that out of my
mind?"
"I do not blame you," said Edgar, feeling ashamed both of himself and
her. And then he added, "He is a rich man's son, but his father is not
old; and he would not receive you gladly into his family. Forgive me
that I say so--I ought to tell you that I am not a fair judge. I am
going to marry Harry's sister, and they object very much to me."
"Object to you!--they are ill to please," cried Margaret, with simple
natural indignation. "But if you were in the family, that would make
things easier for us," she added, wistfully, looking up in his face.
"You have made up your mind, then, to run the risk?" said Edgar, feeling
his heart sink.
"I did not say that." She gave another glance at the house again. Willie
was standing at the door, in the morning sunshine, and beckoned to her
to come back. She turned to him, as a flower turns to the sun. "No, I am
far, far from saying that," said the young woman, with a mixture of
sadness and gladness, turning to obey the summons.
Edgar stood still, looking after her with wondering gaze. The
good-looking sailor, whose likeness to himself did not make him proud,
was a poor creature enough to be as the sun in the heavens to this
beautiful, stately young woman, who looked as if she had been born to be
a princess. What a strange world it is, and how doubly strange is human
nature! Willie had but to hold up a finger, and Margaret would follow
him to the end of the earth; though the rest of his friends judged him
rightly enough, and though even little Jeanie, though she loved, could
scarcely approve her brother, Margaret was ready to give up even her
hope of wealth and state, which she loved, for this Sultan's notice.
Strange influence, which no man could calculate upon, which no prudence
restrained, nor higher nor lower sentiment could quite subdue!
Edgar followed his beautiful cousin to the house with pitying eyes. He
did not want her to marry Harry Thornleigh, but even to marry Harry
Thornleigh, though she did not love him, seemed less degrading than to
hang upon the smile, the careless whistle to his hand, of a man so
inferior to her. I don't know if, in reality, Willie was inferior to
Margaret. She, for one, would have been quite satisfied with him; but
great beauty creates an atmosphere about it which dazzles the beholder.
It was not fit, Edgar felt, in spite of himself, that a woman so lovely
should thus be thrown away.
As this is but an episode in my story, I may here follow Margaret's
uncomfortable wooing to its end. Poor Harry, tantalized and driven
desperate by a letter, which seemed, to Margaret, the most gently
temporising in the world, and which was intended to keep him from
despair, and to retain her hold upon him until Willie's purposes were
fully manifested, at last made his appearance at Loch Arroch Head, where
she was paying the Campbells a visit, on the day after Edgar left the
loch. He came determined to hear his fate decided one way or another,
almost ill with the excitement in which he had been kept, wilder than
ever in the sudden passion which had seized upon him like an evil
spirit. He met her, on his unexpected arrival, walking with Willie, who,
having nothing else to do, did not object to amuse his leisure with his
beautiful cousin, whose devotion to him, I fear, he knew. Poor Margaret!
I know her behaviour was ignoble, but I regret--as I have confessed to
the reader--that she did not become the great lady she might have been;
and, notwithstanding that Edgar's position would have been deeply
complicated thereby, I wish the field had been left clear for Harry
Thornleigh, who would have made her a good enough husband, and to whom
she would have made, in the end, a very sweet wife. Forgive me, young
romancist, I cannot help this regret. Even at that moment Margaret did
not want to lose her young English Squire, and her friends were so far
from wanting to lose him that Harry, driven to dire disgust, hated them
ever after with a strenuous hatred, which he transferred to their nation
generally, not knowing any better. He lingered for a day or more,
waiting for the answer which Margaret was unwilling to give, and
tortured by Willie, who, seeing the state of affairs, felt his vanity
involved, and was more and more loverlike to his cousin. The issue was
that Harry rushed away at last half mad, and went abroad, and wasted his
substance more than he had ever done up to that moment, damaged his
reputation, and encumbered his patrimony, and fell into that state of
cynical disbelief in everybody, which, bad as are its effects even upon
the cleverest and brightest intelligence, has a worse influence still
upon the stupid, to whom there is no possibility of escape from its
withering power.
When Harry was fairly off the scene, his rival slackened in his
attentions; and after a while Margaret returned to her brother, and they
did their best to retrieve their standing at Tottenham's, and to make
the position of the doctor's family at Harbour Green a pleasant one. But
Lady Mary, superior to ordinary prejudices as she was, was not so
superior as to be altogether just to Margaret, who, though she deserved
blame, got more blame than she deserved. The Thornleighs all believed
that she had "laid herself out" to "entrap" Harry--which was not the
case; and Lady Mary looked coldly upon the woman who had permitted
herself to be loved by a man so far above her sphere. And then Lady Mary
disliked the doctor, who never could think even of the most interesting
"case" so much as to be indifferent to what people were thinking of
himself. So Harbour Green proved unsuccessful, as their other
experiments had proved, and the brother and sister drifted off again
into the world, where they drift still, from place to place, always
needy, anxious, afraid of their gentility, yet with that link of
fraternal love between them, and with that toleration of each other and
mutual support, which gives a certain beauty, wherever they go, to the
family group formed by this handsome brother and sister, and the
beautiful child, whom her uncle cherishes almost as dearly as her mother
does.
Ah, me! if Margaret had made that "good match," though it was not all
for love, would it not have been better for everybody concerned?
CHAPTER XXII.
Another Winding-up.
I hope it will not give the reader a poor idea of Edgar's heart if I say
that it was with a relief which it was impossible to exaggerate that he
felt the last dreary day of darkness pass, and was liberated from his
melancholy duties. This did not affect his sorrow for the noble
old woman who had made him at once her confidant and her
inheritor--inheritor not of land or wealth, but of something more subtle
and less tangible. But indeed for her there was no sorrow needed. Out of
perennial disappointments she had gone to her kind, to those with whom
she could no longer be disappointed. Heaven had been "but a step" to
her, which she took smiling. For her the hearse, the black funeral, the
nodding plumes, were inappropriate enough; but they pleased the family,
of whom it never could be said by any detractor that they had not paid
to their mother "every respect."
Edgar felt that his connection with them was over for ever when he took
leave of them on the evening of the funeral. The only one over whom his
heart yearned a little was Jeanie, who was the true mourner of the only
mother she had ever known, but who, in the midst of her mourning, poor
child, felt another pang, perhaps more exquisite, at the thought of
seeing him, too, no more. All the confusion of sentiment and feeling, of
misplaced loves and indifferences, which make up the world were in this
one little family. Jeanie had given her visionary child's heart to
Edgar, who, half aware of, half disowning the gift, thought of her ever
with tender sympathy and reverence, as of something sacred. Margaret,
less exquisite in her sentiments, yet a loving soul in her way, had
given hers to Willie, who was vain of her preference, and laughed at
it--who felt himself a finer fellow, and she a smaller creature because
she loved him. Dr. Charles, uneasy soul, would have given his head had
he dared to marry Jeanie, yet would not, even had she cared for him,
have ventured to burden his tottering gentility with a wife so homely.
Thus all were astray from the end which might have made each a nobler
and certainly a happier creature. Edgar never put these thoughts into
words, for he was too chivalrous a man even to allow to himself that a
woman had given her heart to him unsought; but the complications of
which he was conscious filled him with a vague pang--as the larger
complications of the world--that clash of interests, those broken
threads, that never meet, those fulnesses and needinesses, which never
can be brought to bear upon each other--perplex and pain the spectator.
He was glad, as we all are, to escape from them; and when he reached
London, where his love was, and where, the first thing he found on his
arrival was the announcement of his appointment, his heart rose with a
sudden leap, spurning the troubles of the past, in elastic revulsion. He
had his little fortune again, not much, at any time, but yet something,
which Gussy could hang at her girdle, and his old mother's watch for
her, quaint, but precious possession. He was scarcely anxious as to his
reception, though she had written him but one brief note since his
absence; for Edgar was himself so absolutely true that it did not come
into his heart that he could be doubted. But he could not go to Gussy at
once, even on his arrival. Another and a less pleasant task remained for
him. He had to meet his sister at the hotel she had gone to, and be
present at the clandestine marriage--for it was no better--which was at
last to unite legally the lives of Arthur Arden and Clare.
Clare had arrived in town the evening before. He found her waiting for
him, in her black dress, her children by her, in black also. She was
still as pale as when he left her at Arden, but she received him with
more cordiality than she had shown when parting with him. There was
something in her eyes which alarmed him--an occasional vagueness, almost
wildness.
"We did wrong, Edgar," she said, when the children were sent away, and
they were left together--"we did wrong."
"In what did we do wrong, Clare?"
"In ever thinking of those--those papers. We should have burnt them, you
and I together. What was it to anyone what happened between us? We were
the sole Ardens of the family--the only ones to be consulted."
"Clare! Clare! I am no Arden at all. Would you have had me live on a lie
all my life, and build my own comfort upon some one else's wrong?"
"You were always too high-flown, Edgar," she said, with the practical
quiet of old. "Why did you come to me whenever you heard that trouble
was coming? Because you were my brother. Instinct proves it. If you are
my brother, then it is you who should be master at Arden, and
not--anyone else."
"It is true I am your brother," he said, sitting down by her, and
looking tenderly into her colourless face.
"Then we were wrong, Edgar--we were wrong--I know we were wrong; and now
we must suffer for it," she said, with a low moan. "My boy will be like
you, the heir, and yet not the heir; but for him I will do more than I
did for you. I will not stop for lying. What is a lie? A lie does not
break you off from your life."
"Does it not? Clare, if you would think a moment----"
"Oh! I think!" she cried--"I think!--I do nothing but think! Come, now,
we must not talk any more; it is time to go."
They drove together in a street cab to an obscure street in the city,
where there was a church which few people ever entered. I doubt if this
choice was so wise as they thought, but the incumbent was old, the clerk
old, and everything in their favour, so far as secrecy was concerned.
Arthur Arden met them there, pale, but eager as any bridegroom could be.
Clare had her veil--a heavy veil of black lace--over her face; the very
pew-opener shuddered at such a dismal wedding, and naturally all the
three officials, clergyman, clerk, and old woman, exerted all their aged
faculties to penetrate the mystery. The bridal party went back very
silently in another cab to Clare's hotel, where Arthur Arden saw his
children, seizing upon them with hungry love and caresses. He did not
suspect, as Edgar did, that the play was not yet played out.
"You have never said that you forgive me, Clare," he said, after, to his
amazement, she had sent her boy and girl away.
"I cannot say what I do not mean," she said, in a very low and tremulous
voice. "I have said nothing all this time; now it is my turn to speak.
Oh! don't look at me so, Edgar!--don't ask me to be merciful with your
beseeching eyes! We were not merciful to you."
"What does she mean?" said Arthur Arden, looking dully at him; and then
he turned to his wife. "Well, Clare, you've had occasion to be angry--I
don't deny it. I don't excuse myself. I ought to have looked deeper into
that old affair. But the punishment has been as great on me as on you."
"Oh, the punishment!" she cried. "What is the punishment in comparison?
It is time I should tell you what I am going to do."
"There, there now!" he said, half frightened, half coaxing. "We are
going home. Things will come right, and time will mend everything. No
one knows but Edgar, and we can trust Edgar. I will not press you for
pardon. I will wait; I will be patient----"
"I am not going home any more. I have no home," she said.
"Clare, Clare!"
"Listen to what I say. I am ill. There shall be no slander--no story for
the world to talk of. I have told everybody that I am going to Italy for
my health. It need not even be known that you don't go with me. I have
made all my arrangements. You go your way, and I go mine. It is all
settled, and there is nothing more to say."
She rose up and stood firm before them, very pale, very shadowy, a
slight creature, but immovable, invincible. Arthur Arden knew his wife
less than her brother did. He tried to overcome her by protestations, by
entreaties, by threats, by violence. Nothing made any impression upon
her; she had made her decision, and Heaven and earth could not turn her
from it. Edgar had to hold what place he could between them--now
seconding Arden's arguments, now subduing his violence; but neither the
one nor the other succeeded in their efforts. She consented to wait in
London a day or two, and to allow Edgar to arrange her journey for
her--a journey upon which she needed and would accept no escort--but
that was all. Arden came away a broken man, on Edgar's arm, almost
sobbing in his despair.
"You won't leave me, Edgar--you'll speak for me--you'll persuade her it
is folly--worse than folly!" he cried.
*       *       *       *       *
It was long before Edgar could leave him, a little quieted by promises
of all that could be done. Arden clung to him as to his last hope. Thus
it was afternoon when at last he was able to turn his steps towards
Berkeley Square.
*       *       *       *       *
Gussy knew he was to arrive in town that morning, and, torn by painful
doubts as she was, every moment of delay naturally seemed to her a
further evidence that Edgar had other thoughts in his mind more
important to him than she was. She had said nothing to anyone about
expecting him, but within herself had privately calculated that by
eleven o'clock at least she might expect him to explain everything and
make everything clear. Eleven o'clock came, and Gussy grew distraite,
and counted unconsciously the beats of the clock, with a pulsation
quicker and quite as loud going on in her heart. Twelve o'clock, and her
heart grew sick with the deferred hope, and the explanation seemed to
grow dim and recede further and further from her. He had never mentioned
Margaret in his letters, which were very short, though frequent; and
Gussy knew that her brother, in wild impatience, had gone off two days
before to ascertain his fate. But she was a woman, and must wait till
her fate came to her, counting the cruel moments, and feeling the time
pass slowly, slowly dragging its weary course. One o'clock; then
luncheon, which she had to make a pretence to eat, amid the chatter of
the girls, who were so merry and so loud that she could not hear the
steps without and the knocks at the door.
When they were all ready to go out after, Gussy excused herself. She had
a headache, she said, and indeed she was pale enough for any headache.
He deserved that she should go out as usual, and wait no longer to
receive him; but she would not treat him as he deserved. When they were
all gone she could watch at the window, in the shade of the curtains, to
see if he was coming, going over a hundred theories to explain his
conduct. That he had been mistaken in his feeling all along, and never
had really cared for her; that Margaret's beauty had been too much for
him, and had carried him away; that he cared for her a little, enough to
fulfil his engagements, and observe a kindly sort of duty towards her,
but that he had other friends to see, and business to do, more important
than she was. All these fancies surged through her head as she stood,
the dark damask half hiding her light little figure at the window.
The days had lengthened, the sounds outside were sounds of spring, the
trees in the square garden were coloured faintly with the first tender
wash of green. Steps went and came along the pavement, carriages drew
up, doors opened and shut, but no Edgar. She was just turning from the
window, half blind and wholly sick with the strain, when the sound of a
light, firm foot on the stair caught her ears, and Edgar made his
appearance at last. There was a glow of pleasure on his face, but care
and wrinkles on his forehead. Was the rush with which he came forward
to her, and the warmth of his greeting, and the light on his face,
fictitious? Gussy felt herself warm and brighten, too, involuntarily,
but yet would have liked best to sit down in a corner and cry.
"How glad I am to find you alone!" he said. "What a relief it is to get
here at last! I am tired, and dead beat, and sick and sorry, dear. Now I
can breathe and rest."
"You have been long, long of coming," said Gussy, half wearily, half
reproachfully.
"Haven't I? It seems about a year since I arrived this morning, and not
able to get near you till now. Gussy, tell me, first of all, did you see
it?--do you know?"
"What?" Her heart was melting--all the pain and all the anger, quite
unreasonably as they had risen, floating away.
"Our Consulship," he said, opening up his newspaper with one hand, and
spreading it out, to be held by the other hand, on the other side of
her. The two heads bent close together to look at this blessed
announcement. "Not much for you, my darling--for me everything," said
Edgar, with a voice in which bells of joy seemed to be ringing, dancing,
jostling against each other for very gladness. "I was half afraid you
would see it before I brought the news."
"I had no heart to look at the paper this morning," she said.
"No heart! Something has happened? Your father--Harry--what is it?"
cried Edgar, in alarm.
"Oh! nothing," cried Gussy, crying. "I was unhappy, that was all. I did
not know what you would say to me. I thought you did not care for me. I
had doubts, dreadful doubts! Don't ask me any more."
"Doubts--of me!" cried Edgar, with a surprised, frank laugh.
Never in her life had Gussy felt so much ashamed of herself. She did not
venture to say another word about those doubts which, with such
laughing, pleasant indifference, he had dismissed as impossible. She sat
in a dream while he told her everything, hearing it all like a tale that
she had read in a book. He brought out the old watch and gave it to her,
and she kissed it and put it within her dress, and cried when he
described to her the last words of his old mother. Loch Arroch and all
its homely circumstances became as a scene of the Scriptures to Gussy;
she seemed to see a glory of ideal hills and waters, and the moonlight
filling the sky and earth, and the loveliness of the night which made it
look "but a step" between earth and heaven. Her heart grew so full over
those details that Edgar, unsuspicious, never discovered the compunction
which mingled in that sympathetic grief. He told her about his journey;
then paused, and looked her in the eyes.
"Last year it was you who travelled with me. You were the little
sister?" he said. "Ah! yes, I know it was you. You came and kissed me in
my sleep----"
"Indeed I did not, sir!" cried Gussy, in high indignation. "I would not
have done such a thing for all the world."
Edgar laughed, and held her so fast that she could not turn from him.
"You did in spirit," he said; "and I had it in a dream. Ever since I
have had a kind of hope in my life; I dreamt that you put the veil
aside, and I saw you. When I woke I could not believe it, though I knew
it; but the other sister, the real one, would not tell me your name."
"Poor sister Susan!" cried Gussy, the tears disappearing, the sunshine
bursting out over all her face; "she will not like me to go back into
the world."
"Nor to go out to Italy as a Consul," said Edgar, gay as a boy in his
new happiness, "to talk to all the ships' captains, and find out about
the harbour dues."
"Foolish! there are no ship captains, nor ships either, nor dues of any
kind--"
"Nothing but the bay and the hills, and the sunsets and the moonrises;
the Riviera, which means Paradise--"
"And to be together--"
"Which has the same meaning," he said. And then they stopped in this
admirable fooling, and laughed the foolish laughter of mere happiness,
which is not such a bad thing, when one can have it, once in a way.
"What a useless, idle, Sybarite life you have sketched out for us!"
Gussy said at last. "I hope it is not a mere sunshiny sinecure. I hope
there is something to do."
"I am very good at doing nothing," Edgar replied--too glad, at last, to
return to homely reality and matter of fact; and until the others came
home, these two talked as much nonsense as it is given to the best of us
to talk; and got such good of it as no words can describe.
When Lady Augusta returned, she pretended to frown upon Edgar, and
smiled; and then gave him her hand, and then inclined her cheek towards
him. They had the paper out again, and she shook her head; then kissed
Gussy, and told them that Spezzia was the most lovely place in all the
world. Edgar stayed to dinner, as at last a recognised belonging of the
household, and met Lord Granton, who was somewhat frightened of him, and
respectful, having heard his praises celebrated by Mary as something
more than flesh and blood; and for that evening "the Grantons" that were
to be, were nobodies--not even redeemed from insignificance by the fact
that their marriage was approaching, while the other marriage was still
in the clouds.
"How nice it would be if they could be on the same day!" little Mary
whispered, rather, I fear, with the thought of recovering something of
her natural consequence as bride than for any other reason.
"As if the august ceremonial used at an Earl's wedding would do for a
Consul's!" cried saucy Gussy, tossing her curls as of old. And
notwithstanding Edgar's memories, and the dark shadow of Clare's
troubles that stood by his side, and the fear that now and then
overwhelmed them all about Harry's movements--in spite of all this, I do
not think a merrier evening was ever spent in Berkeley Square. Gussy had
been in a cloud, in a veil, for all these years; she had not thought it
right to laugh much, as the Associate of a Sisterhood--which is to say
that Gussy was not happy enough to want to laugh, and founded that grey,
or brown, or black restriction for herself, with the ingenuity of an
unscrupulous young woman. But now sweet laughter had become again as
natural to her as breath.
CHAPTER XXIII.
H.B.M.'s Consul.--Conclusion.
Clare carried out her intentions, unmoved by all the entreaties
addressed to her. She heard everything that was said with perfect calm;
either her capabilities of emotion were altogether exhausted, or her
passionate sense of wrong was too deep to show at the surface, and she
was calm as a marble statue; but she was equally inflexible. Edgar
turned, in spite of himself, into Arthur Arden's advocate; pleaded with
her, setting forth every reason he could think of, partly against his
own judgment--and failed. Her husband, against whom she did not
absolutely close her door, threw himself at her feet, and entreated, for
the children's sake, for the sake of all that was most important to them
both--the credit of their house, the good name of their boy. These were
arguments which with Clare, in her natural mind, would have been
unanswerable; but that had happened to Clare which warps the mind from
its natural modes of thought. The idea of disgrace had got into her very
soul, like a canker. She was unable to examine her reasons--unable to
resist, even in herself, this overwhelming influence; it overcame her
principles, and even her prejudices, which are more difficult to
overcome. The fear of scandal, which those who knew Clare would have
supposed sufficient to make her endure anything, failed totally here.
She knew that her behaviour would make the world talk, and she even felt
that, with this clue to some profound disagreement between her husband
and herself, the whole story might be more easily revealed, and her
boy's heirship made impossible; but even with this argument she could
not subdue herself, nor suffer herself to be subdued. The sense of
outrage had taken possession of her; she could not forget it--could not
realize the possibility of ever forgetting it. It was not that she had
been brought within the reach of possible disgrace. She was disgraced;
the very formality of the new marriage, though she consented to it
without question, as a necessity, was a new outrage. In short, Clare,
though she acted with a determination and steadiness which seemed to add
force to her character, and showed her natural powers as nothing else
had ever done, was not, for the first time in her life, a free agent.
She had been taken possession of by a passionate sense of injury, which
seized upon her as an evil spirit might seize upon its victim. In the
very fierceness of her individual resentment, she ceased to be an
individual, and became an abstraction, a woman wronged, capable of
feeling, knowing, thinking of nothing but her wrong. This made all
arguments powerless, all pleas foolish. She could not admit any
alternative into her mind; her powers of reasoning failed her altogether
on this subject; on all others she was sane and sensible, but on this
had all the onesidedness, the narrowness of madness--or of the
twin-sister of madness--irrepressible and irrepressed passion.
Without knowing anything of the real facts of the story, the Thornleighs
were admitted to see her, on Clare's own suggestion; for her warped mind
was cunning to see where an advantage could be drawn from partial
publicity. They found her on her sofa, looking, in the paleness which
had now become habitual to her, like a creature vanishing out of the
living world.
"Why did you not let us know you were ill? You must have been suffering
long, and never complained!" cried Lady Augusta, moved almost to tears.
"Not very long," said Clare.
She had permitted her husband to be present at this interview, to keep
up appearances to the last; and Arthur felt as if every word was a dart
aimed at him, though I do not think she meant it so.
"Not long! My dear child, you are quite thin and wasted; this cannot
have come on all at once. But Italy will do you all the good in the
world," Lady Augusta added, trying to be cheerful. "They, you know,
are going to Italy too."
"But not near where I shall be," said Clare.
"You must go further south? I am very sorry. Gussy and you would have
been company for each other. You are not strong enough for company? My
poor child! But once out of these cold spring winds, you will do well,"
said kind Lady Augusta.
But though she thus took the matter on the surface, she felt that there
was more below. Her looks grew more and more perplexed as they discussed
Edgar's appointment, and the humble beginning which the young couple
would make in the world.
"It is very imprudent--very imprudent," Lady Augusta said, shaking her
head. "I have said all I can, Mrs. Arden, and so has Mr. Thornleigh. I
don't know how they are to get on. It is the most imprudent thing I ever
heard of."
"Nothing is imprudent," said Clare, with a hard, dry intonation, which
took all pleasant meaning out of the words, "when you can trust fully
for life or death; and my brother Edgar is one whom everybody can
trust."
"At all events, we are both of us old enough to know our own minds,"
said Gussy, hastily, trying to laugh off this impression. "If we choose
to starve together, who should prevent us?"
Arthur Arden took them to their carriage, but Lady Augusta remarked that
he did not go upstairs again. "There is something in all this more than
meets the eye," she said, oracularly.
Many people suspected this, after Lady Augusta, when Clare was gone, and
when it came out that Mr. Arden was not with her, but passing most of
his time in London, knocking about from club to club, through all the
dreary winter. He made an effort to spend his time as virtuously as
possible that first year; but the second year he was more restless and
less virtuous, having fallen into despair. Then everybody talked of the
breach between them, and a great deal crept out that they had thought
buried in silence. Even the real facts of the case were guessed at,
though never fully established, and the empty house became the subject
of many a tale. People remarked that there were many strange stories
about the Ardens; that they had behaved very strangely to the last
proprietor before Arthur; that nobody had ever heard the rights of that
story, and that Edgar had been badly used.
Whilst all this went on, Clare lived gloomy and retired by herself, in a
little village on the Neapolitan coast. She saw nobody, avoiding the
wandering English, and everybody who could have known her in better
times; and I don't know how long her reason could have stood the wear
and tear, but for the illness and death of the poor little heir, whose
hapless position had given the worst pang to her shame and horror.
Little Arthur died, his mother scarcely believing it, refusing to think
such a thing possible. Her husband had heard incidentally of the child's
illness, and had hurried to the neighbourhood, scarcely hoping to be
admitted. But Clare neither welcomed him nor refused him admission, but
permitted his presence, and ignored it. When the child was gone,
however, it was Arthur's vehement grief which first roused her out of
her stupor.
"It is you who have done it!" she cried, turning upon him with eyes full
of tearless passion. But she did not send him out of her house. She felt
ill, worn out in body and mind, and left everything in his hands. And
by-and-by, when she came to herself, Clare allowed herself to be taken
home, and fled from her duties no longer.
This was the end of their story. They were more united in the later
portion of their lives than in the beginning, but they have no heir to
come after them. The history of the Ardens will end with them, for the
heir-at-law is distant in blood, and has a different name.
As for the other personages mentioned in this story, Mr. Tottenham still
governs his shop as if it were an empire, and still comes to a
periodical crisis in the shape of an Entertainment, which threatens to
fail up to the last moment, and then is turned into a great success. The
last thing I have heard of Tottenham's was, that it had set up a little
daily newspaper of its own, written and printed on the establishment,
which Mr. Tottenham thought very likely to bring forward some latent
talent which otherwise might have been lost in dissertations on the
prices of cotton, or the risings and fallings of silks. After Gussy's
departure, I hear the daily services fell off in the chapel; flowers
were no longer placed fresh and fragrant on the temporary altar, there
was no one to play the harmonium, and the attendance gradually
decreased. It fell from a daily to a weekly service, and then came to an
end altogether, for it was found that the young ladies and the gentlemen
preferred to go out on Sunday, and to choose their own preachers after
their differing tastes. How many of them strayed off to chapel instead
of church, it would have broken Gussy's heart to hear. I do not think,
however, that this disturbed Mr. Tottenham much, who was too viewy not
to be very tolerant, and who liked himself to hear what every new
opinion had to say for itself. Lady Mary was very successful with her
lectures, and I hope improved the feminine mind very much at Harbour
Green. She thought she improved her own mind, which was of course a
satisfaction; and did her best to transmit to little Molly very high
ideas of intellectual training; but Molly was a dunce, as providentially
happens often in the families of very clever people; and distinguished
herself by a curious untractableness, which did not hinder her from
being her mother's pride, and the sweetest of all the cousins--or so at
least Lady Mary thought.
The marriage of "the Grantons" took place in April, with the greatest
clat. It was at Easter, when everybody was in the country; and was
one of the prettiest of weddings, as well as the most magnificent, which
Thornleigh ever saw. Mary's presents filled a large room to overflowing.
She got everything possible and impossible that ever bride was blessed
with; and the young couple went off with a maid, and a valet and a
courier, and introductions to every personage in Europe. Their movements
were chronicled in the newspapers; their letters went and came in
ambassadorial despatch boxes. Short of royalty, there could have been
nothing more splendid, more "perfectly satisfactory," as Lady Augusta
said. The only drawback was that Harry would not come to his sister's
wedding; but to make up for that everybody else came--all the great
Hauteville connections, and Lady Augusta's illustrious family, and all
the Thornleighs, to the third and fourth generations. Not only
Thornleigh itself, but every house within a radius of ten miles was
crowded with fine people and their servants; and the bells were rung in
half a dozen parish churches in honour of the wedding. It was described
fully in the Morning Post, with details of all the dresses, and of the
bride's ornaments and coiffure.
"We shall have none of these fine things, I suppose," Gussy said, when
it was all over, turning to Edgar with a mock sigh.
"No, my dear; and I don't see how you could expect them," said Lady
Augusta. "Instead of spending our money vainly on making a great show
for you, we had much better save it, to buy some useful necessary things
for your housekeeping. Mary is in quite a different case."
"Buy us pots and pans, mamma," said Gussy, laughing; "though perhaps
earthen pipkins would do just as well in Italy. We shall not be such a
credit to you, but we shall be much cheaper. There is always something
in that."
"Ah! Gussy, it is easy to speak now; but wait till you are buried in the
cares of life," said her mother, going away to superintend the
arrangements for the ball in the evening. So grand a wedding was
certainly very expensive; she never liked to tell anyone how much that
great ceremonial cost.
A little later, the little church dressed itself in a few modest spring
flowers, and the school-children, with baskets full of primroses--the
last primroses of the season--made a carpet under Gussy's feet as she,
in her turn, went along the familiar path between the village
gravestones, a bride. There were not more than a dozen people at the
breakfast, and Lady Augusta's little brougham took them to the station
afterwards, where they set out quite humbly and cheerily by an ordinary
train.
"Quite good enough for a Consul," Gussy said, always the first to laugh
at her own humbleness. She wore a grey gown to go away in, which did not
cost a tenth part so much as Lady Granton's, and the Post took no
notice of them. They wandered about their own country for a week or two,
like the Babes in the Wood, Gussy said, expected in no great country
house, retiring into no stately seclusion, but into the far more
complete retirement of common life and common ways. Gussy, as she was
proud to tell, had learned to do many things in her apprenticeship to
the sisters of the Charity-house as associate of the order; and I think
the pleasure to her of this going forth unattended, unsuspected, in the
freedom of a young wife--the first smack of absolute freedom which women
ever taste--had something far more exquisite in it to Gussy than any
delight her sister could have in her more splendid honeymoon. Lord and
Lady Granton were limited, and kept in curb by their own very greatness;
they were watched over by their servants, and kept by public opinion in
the right way; but Edgar and Gassy went where they would, as free as
the winds, and thought of nobody's opinion. The Consul in this had an
unspeakable advantage over the Earl.
They got to their home at last on a May evening, when Italy is indeed
Paradise; they had driven all day long from the Genoa side along the
lovely Riviera di Levante, tracing the gracious curves from village to
village along that enchanting way. The sun was setting when they came in
sight of Spezzia, and before they reached the house which had been taken
for them, the Angelus was sounding from the church, and the soft
dilating stars of Italian skies had come out to hear the homely litany
sung shrilly in side-chapels, and out of doors, among the old nooks of
the town, of the angelic song, "Hail, Mary, full of grace!" The women
were singing in an old three-cornered piazzetta, close under the loggia
of the Consul's house, which looked upon the sea. On the sea itself the
magical sky was shining with all those listening stars. In Italy the
stars take more interest in human life than they do in this colder
sphere. Those that were proper to that space of heaven, crowded
together, Edgar thought to himself, to see his bride. On the horizon the
sea and sky blended in one infinite softness and blueness; the lights
began to twinkle in the harbour and in its ships; the far-off villages
among the woods lent other starry tapers to make the whole landscape
kind and human. Heaven and earth were softly illuminated, not for
them--for the dear common uses and ends of existence; yet unconsciously
with a softer and fuller lustre, because of the eyes that looked upon
them so newly, as if earth and heaven, and the kindly light, and all the
tender bonds of humanity, had been created fresh that very day.
THE END.
PRINTING OFFICE OF THE PUBLISHER.
*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FOR LOVE OF LIFE; VOL. 2 OF 2 ***
Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.
Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.
START: FULL LICENSE
THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK
To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.
Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works
1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.
1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.
1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.
1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.
1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:
1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
you are located before using this eBook.
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.
1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.
1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.
1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.
1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.
1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.
1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:
* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation."
* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
works.
* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
receipt of the work.
* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.
1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.
1.F.
1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.
1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.
1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.
1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.
1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.
1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.
Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm
Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.
Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org
Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation
The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.
The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact
Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation
Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.
The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate
While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.
International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.
Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate
Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.
Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.
Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org
This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.